After Standing Rock, Native American films garner mainstream attention

There was a very public fight to stop a pipeline company from crossing sacred land and water. And, it may be helping open doors for a surge of content from Native filmmakers telling their own stories. 

Their films range from documentaries to virtual reality projects to narrative features. They're increasingly popping up at major film festivals and video streaming platforms.

At the Athena Film Festival in New York City in March, producer Gale Anne Hurd introduced her new film. It's called "Mankiller" and tells the story of a Native woman that many audience members may never have heard of.

"It's not that we're uninterested" in these kinds of stories, Hurd said in an interview with NewsHour before introducing the documentary film. "We don't know about her to even ask … I had never heard of Wilma!" Instead, she said, most people only knew about Native women who had been helpful to colonists, such as Sacagawea and Pocahontas, but little else.

Activist Wilma Mankiller Continues To Make An Impact

Wilma Mankiller was the first female chief of the Cherokee Nation. She was first an activist in the California Bay Area who participated in the takeover of Alcatraz Island between 1969 and 1971 to reclaim the land for all American Indians. Wilma had come to California after being forced from her Cherokee home in Oklahoma to a housing project in San Francisco.

Wilma was elected as deputy chief in 1983. After rising to chief two years later, she was twice re-elected as the Cherokees' leader, and worked to revolutionize Indian-run health care. 

Wilma's work has been able to make an impact on a national level and former President Bill Clinton awarded her the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1998, which is the highest civilian award in the United States.

"Mankiller" is the latest in a series of films garnering mainstream attention following the fight at Standing Rock over the Dakota Access Pipeline. President Trump allowed the oil pipeline project to start again after former President Obama had stopped it.

Powerful Stories Can Persuade Politicians

It's not that the Native American fight to protect sacred lands was new, but the images coming out of Standing Rock turned powerful people into allies and helped persuade the Obama White House to intervene. 

Meanwhile, coverage from major news networks has also shown what it means to be Native in America, as have social media campaigns that brought the struggle straight to the small screen. Hollywood stars including Leonardo DiCaprio, Shailene Woodley and Mark Ruffalo, among others, took notice. This has made it easier for those stories to get out there, says Romana Emerson, who is a Diné Native American and filmmaker. 

Emerson believes it's not just about the pipeline fight but also other changes. "Accessibility and quality of the technology make it easier for Native filmmakers to tell stories about the places we live and the issues that are affecting our communities," she said. 

New Films Capture The Struggles Of Native Americans

"Mankiller" took six years to make and uses both archival testimony from Wilma's career as an activist and interviews with those closest to her. The film has been well-received all around the country.

The film's director, Valerie Red-Horse, shares a personal connection to Mankiller's life story and said researching Wilma allowed Red-Horse to rediscover her own Cherokee roots.

"Rise" is a documentary style-series that travels to native communities across the country where people are protecting their homelands. Yet another, "Akicita: The Battle of Standing Rock," captures the challenges that the people who call themselves water protectors faced in North Dakota. It is directed by filmmaker Cody Lucich of the Estom Yumeka Maidu Tribe of Enterprise Ranchera. 

Jade Begay grew up without seeing Native people in Hollywood and mainstream media, which is part of the reason she made a new virtual reality film called "Blood Memory." It focuses on the relationship between Native Americans' identity and land.

"It's about spirituality, wisdom, and knowledge we're trying to maintain, carried on through our cultures," Begay said.

"We Are Owning Our Own Authority Over Our Culture"

Ernest Whiteman III, who is Northern Arapaho, directs the First Nations Film and Video Festival, which showcases films by Native American directors. 

"Representation behind the camera means we are owning our own authority over our culture and voice and not just slapping new stereotypes on the screen again," Whiteman said. "There is still much more to do until we get on the playing field that is supposed to be even."

More Indian country storytellers are coming to Hollywood and popular streaming platforms are featuring their films. One example is the 2017 drama "Wind River." This film highlights modern-day challenges tribal law enforcement faces in seeking justice for victims, particularly Native American women.

Brenda Litinger is a Tunica-Buloxi Tribal Council member. She said the film shows, "Lessons from the past are just as applicable today for all Native communities, and for non-Native communities."

Native Actors Are Being Cast In Native Roles

For decades, there has been little Native American storytelling on-screen — and also little representation. 

That may be beginning to change, though, with greater attention paid to the casting of Native American roles. Filmmakers are casting Native actors to play Native characters in their movies.

Actor Wes Studi made history this year by becoming the first Native American to ever present at the Academy Awards. He spoke in Cherokee as he paid tribute to fellow Native military veterans.

More than four decades ago at the 45th Academy Awards ceremony, Apache actress Sacheen Littlefeather famously took the stage on behalf of Marlon Brando. She refused Brando's Best Actor award for his role in "The Godfather" in protest of the treatment Native Americans had received in movies.

"In the future, our hearts and understanding will meet with love and generosity," Littlefeather concluded, before walking offstage to a room half-booing.

Film Festivals Are Screening Indigenous Films

Now, the 2018 Sundance Film Festival lineup has eight indigenous-made films. It also includes a screening of Chris Eyre's 1998 film "Smoke Signals." The movie was the first commercially distributed film written, co-produced and directed by a Native American. Eyre is Cheyenne and Arapaho, and the film tells the story of two young men, Victor and Thomas, who live on an Indian reservation in Idaho.

In Montana, the Big Sky Documentary Film Festival showcases more than 100 documentaries and serves as a qualifying event for the Oscars. The festival announced it waived entry fees for Native filmmakers. For 2018, the festival expanded the categories to include a slot for Native American films directed by Native people.  

Meanwhile, it seems movies are becoming more diverse, according to a report from the University of California Los Angeles. The report looked at 174 films released in 2016. It says audiences want movies and TV shows to have characters who look like them and who they can relate to.

Red-Horse said she knew now was the time to tell the story of Wilma Mankiller, who once said she wanted to be remembered as "the person who helped us restore faith in ourselves."
