The pipeline fight is bringing attention to Native American filmmakers

There was a very public fight going on in North Dakota. A company wanted to build an oil pipeline called the Dakota Access Pipeline on land that is sacred to Native Americans. The Native American tribes were fighting to keep their land safe.

Much of the fight has been in North Dakota and South Dakota. However, all the attention it's getting may be helping Native filmmakers around the country.

Films of all kinds made by Native filmmakers are being shown more at major film festivals. People can also watch more of them through video streaming services.

"I Had Never Heard Of Wilma!"

One example is a new film called "Mankiller." It tells the story of a Native woman that many audience members may never even have heard of.

"It's not that we're uninterested" in these kinds of stories, said the movie's producer Gale Anne Hurd. "We don't know about her to even ask … I had never heard of Wilma!"

Wilma Mankiller was the first female chief of the Cherokee Nation. She has fought for American Indians' rights since the 1960s. Her work has made a difference around the country. Former President Bill Clinton awarded her the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1998. This is the highest non-military award in the United States.

New Films Show What It Means To Be Native In America

"Mankiller" is one of many films drawing attention to the Dakota Access Pipeline. At the same time, coverage from major news networks has also shown what it means to be Native in America. Social media has, too. This has made it easier for those stories to get out there, says Romana Emerson. She is a Diné Native American and filmmaker.

"Mankiller" took six years to make. It uses both interviews from long ago and from those closest to Wilma. The film has been well-received all around the country.

The film's director is Valerie Red-Horse. She said working on the movie helped Red-Horse rediscover her own Cherokee roots.

Another example is "Rise." This is a documentary style-series that travels to native communities across the country where people are protecting their homelands. Additionally, "Akicita: The Battle of Standing Rock" captures the challenges that the people who call themselves water protectors faced in North Dakota. It is directed by a Native American filmmaker. 

Jade Begay grew up without seeing Native people in Hollywood and mainstream media. It's part of the reason she made her film called "Blood Memory." It focuses on the relationship between Native Americans' sense of who they are and the land.

"It's about spirituality, wisdom, and knowledge," Begay said.

Native Americans Have Been Missing From Movies

More Indian country storytellers are coming to Hollywood now. One example is the 2017 drama "Wind River." This film shows challenges tribal law enforcement faces in helping victims, particularly Native American women.

Brenda Litinger is a Tunica-Buloxi Tribal Council member. She said the film shows that lessons from the past still apply today.

For many years, there has been little Native American storytelling on-screen. There have not been very many Native filmmakers or actors, either. That may be beginning to change, though.

Actor Wes Studi made history earlier this year by becoming the first Native American to ever present at the Academy Awards.

Apache actress Sacheen Littlefeather was on stage at the Academy Awards more than 40 years ago. She went on stage on behalf of Marlon Brando to refuse his Best Actor award. He won for his role in "The Godfather." He didn't accept the award in protest of the treatment of Native Americans in movies.

"In the future, our hearts and understanding will meet with love and generosity," Littlefeather said onstage. 

Audiences Want To See People They Can Relate To

Now, the 2018 Sundance Film Festival lineup has eight indigenous-made films. It also includes a screening of Chris Eyre's 1998 film "Smoke Signals." The movie was the first major film written, co-produced and directed by a Native American.

In Montana, the Big Sky Documentary Film Festival showcases more than 100 documentaries. The festival announced Native filmmakers will not pay certain fees. The festival also includes spots for Native American films directed by Native people.  

Meanwhile, it seems movies are becoming more diverse. This means different kinds of people are working on these movies. A report from the University of California Los Angeles show this is what audiences want. People want to watch movies and TV shows with characters who look like them and who they can relate to.

Red-Horse said she knew now was the time to make "Mankiller." It was Wilma Mankiller herself who once said she wanted to be remembered as "the person who helped us restore faith in ourselves."
