Native American filmmakers are receiving more attention for their movies

There was a big fight going on in North Dakota. A company wanted to build an oil pipeline there.  The Dakota Access Pipeline was planned to be built on land that is sacred to Native Americans. The Native American tribes were fighting to keep their land safe.

The land is in North Dakota and South Dakota. The fight was getting attention from all around the country, though. 

This attention may also be helping Native American filmmakers. Their movies are getting more attention. They are also being seen more.

The movies are being shown more at film festivals. People can also watch more of them online.

Mankiller: The First Woman Chief  Of The Cherokee

One example is a new film called "Mankiller." It tells the story of a Native woman named Wilma Mankiller. The filmmakers know that many people have never even heard of her.

Wilma Mankiller was the first woman chief of the Cherokee Nation. This is a large Native American tribe. She has worked for Natives' rights. She has done this for most of her life.

Wilma's work has made a difference. Former President Bill Clinton even gave her an important award for her work.

Movies Are Bringing Attention To Native Americans

Many films are drawing attention to the pipeline fight. 

News stories and social media help, too.

"Mankiller" took six years to make. The film's director is Valerie Red-Horse. She said working on the movie helped Red-Horse rediscover her own Cherokee roots.

Other Native movies are "Rise" and "Akicita: The Battle of Standing Rock." They are sharing the stories of Native Americans across the U.S. 

Audiences Want To See People That Look Like Them

Filmmaker Jade Begay grew up without seeing Native people in movies. That is part of the reason she made her own film. It is about the connection between Native people and the land.

Now, it seems movies are becoming more diverse. This means different kinds of people are working on these movies. This is what audiences want. People want to see characters who look like them.

Red-Horse said she knew now was the time to make "Mankiller." 

Wilma Mankiller once said she wanted to be "the person who helped us restore faith in ourselves."
