Researchers need to get creative in gathering information on marine life
The ocean is a difficult place to do research. Electronics don't mix well with salt water, and waves knock things around. The deeper under the water you go, the darker and colder it gets. Pressure mounts to crushing levels. 

Oceans make up more than two-thirds of Earth's surface. Their waters make up 99 percent of our biosphere. This is the parts of the land, sea and atmosphere in which living things can exist. However, only a small part of it has been mapped with any precision, said John Sparks. He is a scientist at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, which has a new Unseen Oceans exhibition. "We know more about the surface of Mars than the ocean floor," he said.

When scientists want to track how the tiniest plants or the largest of whales move around, they often lack the right tools for the job. Some creatures are carried by currents, some move slowly through bays, and others cross long distances of open ocean. Researchers often have to come up with their own machines and solutions, said Michael Novacek. He is also a curator at the museum. 

Researchers have to make rugged, inexpensive, custom tools and sensors that are adaptable. Examples include a robotic fish that can mix in with schools of fish or squishy grippers that can grab corals with minimal damage. Sparks said, "They build their own equipment. They solve their own problems." Here's how some of them have created ways to track creatures on the move.

Traveling Light With Jellyfish
Kakani Katija, an engineer at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in California, wants to know what moon jellyfish are up to. How do they behave in their natural environment? Do they stay in areas where food is plentiful, or are they completely subject to currents? To answer questions like these, Katija needs data.

The trouble is that the jellies are hard to handle or track. They are delicate and light, so researchers hesitate to saddle them with devices that can drag them down. Most tags and sensors are too big and heavy for them. 

Scientists want to make sure that their tests aren't ruining their data. While studying behavior, how do you ensure that your devices don't change behavior? Katija asked. A data-collecting tag needs to be small and aerodynamic. So Katija and other scientists worked with Florida-based Loggerhead Instruments to engineer a slim tag. The next hurdle was finding a way to attach it.

Katija and the others started playing around with different materials and adhesives. They worked with aquariums to try them out on animals in tanks. One of the best solutions for attaching the tag, it turned out, was in Katija's backpack.

Katija keeps medical glue, for treating cuts, on hand in case her dog gets injured while they're out hiking. That glue proved to be a promising way to attach sensors to the jellyfish. The glue holds tight and then comes off in a few hours or days. The sensors are strung on a line and tied to a float, so the researchers collect them later.

The tags will be used in the waters of Monterey Bay this month. 

Drifting Along With Plankton
Many sea creatures can swim against a current. Plankton, however, cannot. These tiny plants and animals, which provide the base of the marine food chain and are major sources of oxygen in the atmosphere, are drifters who go where the currents take them. Although they are tiny, their fate matters a great deal. Without them, "there goes our oxygen," said Sparks.

Jules Jaffe is a scientist at the Marine Physical Laboratory at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego. He wanted to get a better sense of how and where plankton move. His "miniature underwater robot drifters" stand in for the tiny life forms. Composed of foam pieces around sensors collecting temperature, pressure and more, these light tools are tossed over the side of a boat. Then they ride underwater currents, like plankton.

Researchers use sound to track the devices, which stay in the water for a few hours or a couple of days at a time. So far Jaffe has used them off  La Jolla, California, and the Cayman Islands.

"They're not exactly like a plankton," Jaffe said. For one thing, they are larger, which affects the drag on them as they travel through the water. If the water is moving slowly enough, it's expected that they can get good data from them, he said. "If the water was really accelerating, they might be left behind a little bit, and then we would worry about that."

Jaffe looks forward to the future, expecting "smaller, cheaper, faster things" from 3-D printers. He's already amazed by how his devices have provided a never-before-seen view. "Nobody would have seen this before unless you put yourself in their reference frame," he said. 

Cameras Get A Whale Of A Ride
A researcher stands at the front of a boat, holding a long pole that dangles into the water. There's a whale up ahead. The researcher stretches the pole out a little farther and makes contact. With suction cups, he attaches lightweight sensors to the whale's back. When the whale dives back underwater, a whole scientific crew is going along for the ride.

Jeremy Goldbogen is an assistant professor at Stanford University's Hopkins Marine Station in California. He worked with other scientists to make tags that contain miniature sensors and video recorders. These fit onto a piece of styrofoam a little larger than a human hand. The sensors gather data, and the video feed shows them what's going on.