Researchers create their own tools to learn more about marine life
It is hard to study animals and plants in the ocean. Some tools do not work well in salt water. The ocean's waves are also very strong and knock things around. The deeper you go under the water, the darker and colder it gets.  

Scientists sometimes want to track how fish or plants move around. Some animals are carried by moving water. Some move slowly on their own. Others cross big parts of oceans. Scientists often do not have the right tools to study them, though. So they make their own.

John Sparks is a scientist at the American Museum of Natural History. It is in New York. He said scientists build their own equipment. "They solve their own problems," he said. 

Here is how some have found ways to study ocean life.

Glue And Jellyfish
Kakani Katija works at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in California. She wants to know what jellyfish are doing. Do they stay in areas with plenty of food? Do they follow moving water? To answer questions like these, Katija needs data.

Tags can help with studies. Putting on tags can tell scientists where animals are. The tags also can show other things, like how warm the water is. 

The trouble is that the jellyfish are hard to handle. They are delicate and light. So, scientists do not want to attach tags that can drag them down. Most tags are too heavy for them. 

Scientists want to be sure that their tags do not change what animals do. A tag needs to be small. So Katija and others worked with a company to make a small tag. Then, they had to find a way to attach it.

Katija and the others started trying different things. They tried them out on animals in water tanks. They found an answer in Katija's backpack. She carries medical glue when she goes hiking with her dog. It is to take care of cuts if the dog gets hurt. 

The glue was a way to attach tags to the jellyfish. The glue comes off in a few hours or days. 

The tags will be used this month. 

Mini Robots Follow Plankton
Many fish can swim against currents of moving water. Plankton cannot do that, though. These tiny plants and animals go with the currents. 

They are tiny, but they are important to people. They help to put oxygen into our air. People need oxygen to breathe.  

Jules Jaffe is a scientist at Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego, California. He wanted to know how plankton move. Jaffe did not attach anything to them. Instead, he made a tool to go with them. He created mini-underwater robots. They follow moving water, like plankton.

The tools stay in the water for a few hours or a day or two. Jaffe has used them in two places.  

Whales Ride With Cameras
Jeremy Goldbogen works at Stanford University's Hopkins Marine Station in California. He worked with other scientists to make tags for whales. The tags have a tiny video camera. Scientists can see what is happening.

Scientists attach the tags with suction cups. They go out on a boat and use a pole and line. It is like a fishing pole. They try to make the tags land on a whale. Then the whale takes them along for an underwater ride.