Opinion: Don't let bad news scare you - we're improving as a race

It feels like the world is getting worse, right? War, natural disasters, people breaking laws. The rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer. That's what most people see in the media and think.

I call it the overdramatic view. It makes people worry. It's also incorrect. In fact, most of the world's population makes enough money to live comfortably. They might not be what we think of as middle class, but they aren't unable to have their basic needs met either. Their girls go to school; their children get vaccination shots. Slowly, the world is improving. In the past 200 years, life expectancy has more than doubled. This is how long a person is expected to live.  Although the world faces huge challenges, we have made giant steps of progress.

The overdramatic view draws people to the worst news. The overdramatic view comes from how our brains work. The brain has changed over the years through evolution so we have the best chance of surviving.  

Our brain tells us we want sugar and fat, which used to be life-saving. Food was hard to find. Fat helped when people might go days with little food. Today, too much fat makes being overweight a health problem. Similarly, we want juicy news and overdramatic stories, which used to be the only kind of news and useful information. People needed to know about the danger of this.

The Dangers Of Bad News

We shouldn't cut out all sugar and fat. We also shouldn't ask a doctor to take out the parts of our brain that help us deal with difficult ideas. Still, we need to learn to control how much bad news we read and see.

Troubles do exist in the world. They include overfishing and the trouble it's causing the seas. There's also the growing list of animals that are close to dying out. It's easy to know the bad things happening, but it is harder to know the good things.

Stories about slow improvements aren't catchy enough to make news headlines even when they affect millions. Over the past 20 years, though, the number of people who are very poor is half of what is used to be.

Thanks to the Internet, we hear about more disasters than ever before. Communication has improved.  It is easier for information to be shared across the globe. This is another important step for humans. Because we are hearing about more things, it sounds like things are getting worse. This is not true, though. In the U.S, the number of major crimes has fallen since 1990. Still, the scariest crimes are reported, so most people believe major crimes are worse.

Don't Forget About Improvements

Me saying the world is getting better might feel like I'm saying everything is fine.  That's not even close to true. Everything is not fine. However, it's just as bad to forget about the improvements. When people believe nothing is improving, they may lose hope that anything works.

How can we help our brains remember this? We can make a comparison. The world is like a sick baby born too early. The baby stays in the hospital to slowly get better. The situation is bad, but improving day by day. The world is in a similar situation.

Think about girls' schooling. Ninety percent of grade school girls go to school. For boys, it's 92 percent. Girls are still less educated in the poorest countries, especially in high school and college, but improvements have been made.

When you hear something terrible, ask yourself these questions. If there had been an improvement, would I have heard about that? Even if there had been hundreds of larger improvements, would I have heard about it?
