Opinion: World is gradually getting better, but it's hard to realize it

Things are bad, and it feels like they're getting worse, right? War, natural disasters, crime. The rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer, and we will soon run out of resources unless something serious is done. That's the picture most people see in the media and carry in their heads.

I call it the overdramatic worldview; it's stressful and misleading. In fact, most of the world's population lives in the middle of the income scale, and although they might not be what we think of as middle class, they aren't living in extreme poverty. Their girls go to school; their children get vaccination shots. Perhaps not on every single disease, but step by step, the world is improving. In the past 200 years, life expectancy has more than doubled. Although the world faces huge challenges, we have made immense progress.

The overdramatic worldview draws people to the worst news. My lecturing and testing have brought me to see the overdramatic worldview comes from how our brains work. The brain is a product of millions of years of evolution, so we are hard-wired with instincts that helped our ancestors survive in small groups of hunters and gatherers. We desire sugar and fat, which used to be life-saving energy sources. Food was scarce, and fat helped people when they might go days with little food. Today, desire for sugar makes being overweight a global health problem. Similarly, we want gossip and overdramatic stories, which used to be the only source of news and useful information. 

We shouldn't cut all sugar and fat from our diets and we also shouldn't ask a doctor to remove the parts of our brain that deal with emotions. However, we need to learn to control how much gossip we read and see.

Progress Is Too Slow To Be Newsworthy

It's true there are bad things in this world, such as overfishing and the deterioration of the seas, and the growing list of endangered species. It's easy to know the bad things happening, but harder to know the good things. The miracle of human progress is too slow to qualify as news. Over the past 20 years, though, the amount of people in extreme poverty has been almost cut in half.

Stories about slow improvements rarely make headlines even when they affect millions of people. Thanks to improving technology, we hear about more disasters than ever. This improved reporting is itself a sign of  progress, but it creates the impression of the exact opposite. In the U.S, the serious crime rate has fallen since 1990. Still, the most horrific and shocking crimes are reported, so most people believe serious crime is worse.

My guess is you feel me saying the world is getting better is like me telling you everything is fine, and that feels ridiculous. I agree. Everything is not fine; we should still be concerned. However, it's just as ridiculous to look away from progress. Loss of hope is devastating. When people wrongly believe nothing is improving, they may lose confidence in measures that work.

How can we help our brains realize things are getting better? Think of the world as a sick baby born too early. She has to stay in an incubator but after a week she is improving. Can we say the infant's situation is improving? Yes. Can we say it's bad? Absolutely. Does saying "things are improving" suggest everything is fine, and we should all not worry? No, it's both bad and better. That's how we must think about the world.

Progress In Girls Education

Take girls' education. When women are educated, the workforce becomes stronger and able to make better decisions. Educated mothers have fewer children, and more survive. Ninety percent of girls of primary school age attend school; for boys, it's 92 percent. Girls are still less educated in the poorest countries, especially in secondary and higher education, but progress has been made.

When you hear something terrible, calm yourself by asking: If there had been a positive improvement, would I have heard about that? Even if there had been hundreds of larger improvements, would I have heard?

Like a healthy diet and regular exercise, remembering the improvements should become routine. Start to practice it, and you will make better decisions, stay alert to real dangers and avoid being constantly stressed about the wrong things.

Hans Rosling was a Swedish doctor who died in 2017. This article is from his book "Factfulness: Ten Reasons We're Wrong about the World – and Why Things Are Better Than You Think."
