Opinion: Good news may be hard to find, but world is making progress

It feels like the world is getting worse, right? War, natural disasters, crime. The rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer. We'll soon run out of oil and other supplies unless we find a solution. That's the picture most people see in the media and carry in their heads.

I call it the overdramatic worldview; it's stressful and misleading. In fact, most of the world's population lives in the middle of the income scale, and although they might not be what we think of as middle class, they aren't living in extreme poverty. Their girls go to school; their children get vaccination shots. Step by step, the world is improving. In the past 200 years, life expectancy has more than doubled. This is how long people are expected to live. Although the world faces huge challenges, we have made immense progress.

The overdramatic worldview draws people to the worst news. My lecturing and testing have made me see that overdramatic worldview comes from how our brains work. The brain is a product of millions of years of evolution, so it has changed over time so humans can live longer. 

We love to eat sugar and fat, which used to be life-saving. Food was hard to find, and fat helped people when they might go days with little food. Today, desire for sugar makes being overweight a health problem. Similarly, we want juicy news and overdramatic stories, which used to be the only source of news and useful information. 

Don't Let Bad News Overwhelm You

We shouldn't cut all sugar and fat from our diets. We also shouldn't ask a doctor to remove the parts of our brain that deal with emotions. However, we need to learn to control how much bad news we read and see.

Troubles do exist, such as overfishing and the seas slowly getting worse. There's also the growing list of animals close to extinction. It's easy to know the bad things happening, but it is harder to know the good things. The miracle of human progress is too slow to make the news. Over the past 20 years, though, the amount of people in extreme poverty has been cut to half.

Stories about slow improvements rarely make headlines even when they affect millions. Thanks to improving technology, we hear about more disasters than ever. This improved reporting is itself a sign of progress, but it creates the idea of the opposite. In the U.S, the percentage of serious crime has fallen since 1990. Still, the most horrific and shocking crimes are reported, so most people believe serious crime is worse.

Me saying the world is getting better might feel like I'm saying everything is fine. That's ridiculous. Everything is not fine. However, it's just as ridiculous to ignore progress. Loss of hope is harmful. When people wrongly believe nothing is improving, they may lose confidence in things that work.

World Is Slowly Improving

How can we help our brains remember this? We can make a comparison. The world is like a sick baby born too early. It slowly gets better. That doesn't mean things are not bad. It just means things are slowly improving. The world is in a similar situation.

Take girls' education for example. Ninety percent of girls of grade school age attend school; for boys, it's 92 percent. Girls are still less educated in the poorest countries, especially in high school and college, but progress has been made. Mothers who are able to get their education are having fewer children, and more of them survive.

When you hear something terrible, ask yourself these questions. If there had been an improvement, would I have heard about that? Even if there had been hundreds of larger improvements, would I have heard?

Like eating healthy foods and regular exercise, remembering the improvements should become routine. Start to practice. Soon you'll make better decisions and stay informed about real dangers.

Hans Rosling was a Swedish doctor who died in 2017. This article is from his book "Factfulness: Ten Reasons We're Wrong about the World – and Why Things Are Better Than You Think."
