Opinion: Humans slowly making progress in spite of all the bad news

It feels like the world is getting worse, right? War, disasters, people breaking laws. The rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer. That's what most people see in the media and think.

I call it the overdramatic outlook. People worry too much. The world has problems. It has also made giant steps for the better.

Most of the world's population makes enough money to live a comfortable life. Most can take care of their basic needs like food and shelter. Their girls are able to go to school. And their children get vaccination shots to avoid illness. Slowly, the world is getting better. In the past 200 years, people have become healthier. They live twice as long as they used to.

The overdramatic outlook comes from how our minds work. The mind has adapted over time to keep us alive.

Fat Is Like Overdramatic Stories

We like eating foods that have fat, for example. Doing this used to be life-saving. Food was hard to find. Fat helped when people went days with little food. Today, too much fat makes being overweight a big problem. Like food for the mind, we also want juicy and overdramatic stories. Knowing about danger used to keep people stay alive.

We shouldn't cut out all fat. We also should not ask a doctor to take out the parts of our mind that help us handle danger. We need to learn to limit the troubles we read and see.

Troubles do exist. There are troubles with the environment and seas. There is also the growing list of animals close to dying out. It is easy to know about the bad things happening, but it is harder to know the good things. 

Slow Improvements Get Little Notice

Stories about slow improvements are not catchy enough to make headlines. Thanks to the Internet, we hear more stories than ever before. Communication has become better, and this is another important step for humans. Still, it makes it look as if more disasters are happening. This isn't the case though. When people believe nothing is getting better, they may lose hope that anything works.

How can we help our brains remember this? We can make a comparison. The world is like a sick baby born too early. The baby stays in the hospital. The baby is in bad health, but it's also slowly getting better. The world is in a similar situation.
