Alexander Hamilton, D.C. area share spotlight in picture book by two kids

First, Spencer Park learned all the songs in the hit musical "Hamilton."

Then he read more about Alexander Hamilton. He learned that Hamilton was born in the Caribbean and that both his parents died. He was an orphan. Hamilton journeyed to New York. There, he became a top advisor to George Washington during the American Revolution. He helped write the Constitution, the guidelines for the U.S. government. He also started our national banking system.

Spencer's family went to see the musical in Chicago. After that, Spencer's dad suggested that Spencer write a kids' book about Hamilton. Spencer thought it was "a pretty cool idea." He thinks Hamilton "was such an amazing man."

Kids Write Book About Hamilton And D.C.

The result is "District of Hamilton." It's a colorful 50-page guide, written by Spencer, age 9, and his buddy Alden Humphrey, 8. The book is coming out now because the musical will be at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. for the next three months. That's the closest city to the boys' hometown of Alexandria, Virginia. Tickets can be hard to get, but you can still be part of the Hamilton excitement by doing what Spencer and Alden did: Listen and read.

Public libraries have kid-friendly Hamilton books. Some also have the music from "Hamilton." Now, Spencer and Alden are donating copies of their book to their public library system. Everyone outside the area will need to go to Amazon.com or the Kennedy Center bookstore to get one.

"District of Hamilton" isn't just about Alexander Hamilton's life. It's not just about the District of Columbia, either. Hamilton never lived there. New York City was his home. Alden and Spencer spent five months visiting places in the Washington area with ties to Hamilton and other historic people. Presidents Washington, Thomas Jefferson, the Marquis de Lafayette and Aaron Burr all spent time in D.C. They also have important roles in the musical -- especially Burr, who ended Hamilton's life in a duel, or gunfight, in 1804.

Most Fun Was Re-enacting A Duel

Spencer and Alden both said the most fun they had was re-enacting a duel from 1826. That duel was fought in Virginia by two other historical figures. No one was hurt in that duel. That's also how Alden and Spencer's re-creation with Nerf toys ended, we are happy to report.

Alden liked visiting Thomas Jefferson's Virginia home, which is named Monticello. Its eight-sided rounded roof is shown on the back of most nickels. "District of Hamilton" also takes readers to many other places. It explores Capitol Hill, the Treasury and State departments, Eliza Hamilton's church, the Yorktown battlefield and more.

The authors are pictured on every page, often in costume. Alexander Hamilton is drawn as a hip cartoon called "Alex." He makes funny comments, such as calling himself "a handsome devil" in a painting from the 1800s.

Treasure Hunt With A Prize

All of that would be enough, but there's also a fun surprise inside: The book has a treasure hunt with a prize if you answer seven questions correctly. And two D.C. restaurants are offering free doughnuts or dessert for kids who stop by with the book. Take a break and visit the restaurant room where it happens!
