Two boys take a shot at getting kids hooked on Alexander Hamilton

First, Spencer Park learned all the rap songs in the hit musical "Hamilton."

Then he read more about Alexander Hamilton. Hamilton is the orphaned Caribbean immigrant who became a top aide to George Washington during the American Revolution, an architect of the Constitution and founder of our national banking system.

Eventually, Spencer's family saw the musical in Chicago, Illinois. When his dad suggested he write a kids' book about Hamilton, the Arlington, Virginia, 9-year-old thought it was "a pretty cool idea" because "he was such an amazing man."

Kids Write Book About Hamilton And D.C.

The result is "District of Hamilton." It is a colorful 50-page guide co-authored by Spencer's buddy Alden Humphrey, 8. The book is coming out now because the musical will begin a three-month run June 12 at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in D.C. Tickets can be hard to get, but you can still be part of the Hamilton hubbub by doing what Spencer and Alden did: Listen and read.

Public libraries have kid-friendly Hamilton books. Some also have the music from the show. Spencer and Alden are donating copies of their book to the Arlington County public library system. Everyone else will need to go to Amazon.com or the Kennedy Center bookstore to get one. 

"District of Hamilton" isn't limited to his life or even the District of Columbia. Hamilton never lived in D.C. New York City was his home. But Alden and Spencer spent five months visiting sites across the region with ties not just to Hamilton and his wife, Eliza. In addition, they also explored the sites of  Presidents Washington and Thomas Jefferson, the Marquis de Lafayette and Vice President Aaron Burr. All have key roles in the musical -- especially Burr. He ended Hamilton's life in a duel in 1804.

Re-enacting A Duel

Spencer and Alden both said the most fun they had was re-enacting an 1826 duel fought in Arlington by two other leading political figures. No one was hurt in that duel, however -- which is also how Alden and Spencer's re-creation with Nerf toys ended, we are happy to report.

Alden liked visiting Jefferson's Virginia home, Monticello, with its eight-sided dome. The dome can be seen on the back of most nickel. "District of Hamilton" also takes readers to the National Archives, Capitol Hill, the Treasury and State departments, Eliza Hamilton's church, the Yorktown battlefield and many other places.

The authors are pictured on every page, often in costume. And "Alex," a hip, cartoonish Hamilton, gives snappy comments, such as when he calls himself "a handsome devil" in a painting from the early 19th century.

A Treasure Hunt With A Prize

All of that would be enough, but there's a bonus to blow us all away: The book has a treasure hunt with a prize if you answer seven questions correctly. And two D.C. restaurants are offering free doughnuts or dessert for kids who stop by with the book. Take a break and visit the restaurant room where it happens.
