Young authors tell Alexander Hamilton's story in new picture book

"Hamilton" is a musical about Alexander Hamilton. A musical is a play that has songs in it. 

Spencer Park loves "Hamilton." Spencer is 9 years old. He learned all the songs in the show.

Then Spencer kept learning. He read about Alexander Hamilton. Hamilton who lived in the late 1700s and early 1800s. He worked with George Washington. They fought together in the American Revolution. This was a war between England and the colonies in America. The colonies wanted freedom. They did not want to be ruled by England.  

Dad Had An Idea

Spencer and his family went to see "Hamilton." After, his dad had an idea. He said that Spencer should write a kids' book. It could be all about Hamilton. Spencer thought it was "a pretty cool idea." He said Hamilton "was such an amazing man."

Spencer worked with his friend Alden Humphrey. Alden is 8 years old. Together, they made "District of Hamilton." A district is one part of a city. The book has 50 colorful pages. 

Spencer and Alden gave copies of their book to their city library. They live in Alexandria, Virginia. You can get the book even if you do not live there. It is on Amazon.com. 

A Lot Of Work

Alden and Spencer did a lot of work for the book. They visited many spots around Washington, D.C. It is the capital of the United States. Many government buildings are there. Alden and Spencer saw places where Hamilton had worked. They learned about other important people, too. Many are characters in the musical.  

Alden liked visiting the home of Thomas Jefferson. It is named Monticello. It has an eight-sided rounded roof. 

"District of Hamilton" takes readers to many places. It goes to important government buildings. It visits fields where battles took place.

A Fun Surprise

Spencer and Alden are in the book, too. They are shown on every page. They wear silly costumes. Alexander Hamilton is pictured, too. In the book, he is called "Alex." Alex is a fun character in the book. He says silly things. 

The book is very fun. It comes with a surprise, too. There is a treasure hunt inside the book. Kids win a prize if they get seven questions right.
