Picture book by two kids offers a fun take on Alexander Hamilton

Like many 9-year-olds, Spencer Park loves "Hamilton." He learned all the songs in the popular musical. 

Then he read about Alexander Hamilton. He learned that Hamilton was born in the Caribbean. Both of Hamilton's parents died, making him an orphan. Hamilton moved to New York. He worked closely with George Washington during the American Revolution. They helped the United States fight to become a country separate from England. Hamilton also started our national banking system.

"A Pretty Cool Idea"

Spencer's family went to Chicago to see "Hamilton." After, Spencer's dad suggested that Spencer write a kids' book about Hamilton. Spencer thought it was "a pretty cool idea." He is interested in Alexander Hamilton because "he was such an amazing man."

Spencer and his friend, Alden Humphrey, wrote "District of Hamilton." It's a colorful 50-page guide. The book is out now. That is good timing, because the musical will play in Washington, D.C. for the next three months. That's the closest city to the boys' hometown of Alexandria, Virginia. Tickets are hard to get, but you can participate in the Hamilton excitement by doing what Spencer and Alden did: Listen and read.

Donating Their Book To Library

Public libraries have kid-friendly Hamilton books. Some also have the music from the "Hamilton" musical. Spencer and Alden are giving copies of their book to their public library system. Everyone outside their area will need to go to Amazon.com to get one. 

"District of Hamilton" isn't just about Alexander Hamilton's life. It's also not just about Washington, D.C. Hamilton never lived there. New York City was his home. Alden and Spencer spent five months visiting spots in the Washington, D.C. area. They went to places with ties to Hamilton and other important people in history. Presidents Washington and Thomas Jefferson and Vice President Aaron Burr all spent time in D.C. They also have important roles in the musical -- especially Burr. He ended Hamilton's life in a duel, or gunfight, in 1804.

Spencer and Alden both said the most fun they had was re-enacting another duel from history. That duel was fought in Virginia by two other people. No one was hurt. Alden and Spencer re-created the duels with Nerf toys. No one got hurt in their version, either. 

Book Takes Readers To Many Places

Alden liked visiting Thomas Jefferson's home in Virginia. It is named Monticello. It has an eight-sided rounded roof. This roof is shown on the back of most nickels. "District of Hamilton" takes readers to many other places, too. It explores important government buildings, the Yorktown battlefield, and more.

Authors Pictured On Every Page

Spencer and Alden are pictured on every page. They are often wearing costumes. Alexander Hamilton is drawn as a fun cartoon called "Alex." He says funny things. In one part, he calls himself "a handsome devil" in a painting from the 1800s.

All of that makes the book fun, but it also has a surprise. There is a treasure hunt inside the book. Kids win a prize if they answer seven questions correctly. If you live near D.C. or are traveling there soon, make sure to keep the book with you. Two D.C. restaurants are offering free doughnuts or dessert for kids who stop by with the book.
