Alexander Hamilton stars in new picture book by two kids

Spencer Park loves "Hamilton." The 9-year-old learned all the songs in the popular musical about Alexander Hamilton. 

Then Spencer read about Alexander Hamilton. Hamilton was born in the 1700s on an island in the Caribbean, a sea south of Florida. Both of his parents died. The orphan moved to New York and worked with George Washington. Together they fought in the American Revolution. It was a war between England and the colonies in America. The colonies wanted freedom. They did not want to be ruled by England. Hamilton also started our country's banking system.

"Such An Amazing Man"

Spencer's family went to Chicago to see "Hamilton." After, Spencer's dad had an idea. He said that Spencer should write a kids' book about Hamilton. Spencer thought it was "a pretty cool idea." He said Alexander Hamilton "was such an amazing man."

Spencer and his friend, 8-year-old Alden Humphrey, got to work. They wrote "District of Hamilton." A district is one part of a city. The book is a colorful 50-page guide about the history of the Washington, D.C. area. 

Spencer and Alden are giving copies of their book to their public library. They live in Alexandria, Virginia. If you don't live there, you can buy the book online. It is available on Amazon.com. 

Authors Visit Many Places Around D.C.

Alden and Spencer did a lot of work for their book. They visited many spots around Washington, D.C. They saw places that had connections to Hamilton. They learned about other important people from history. Many of these people are characters in the musical. 

Alden liked visiting Thomas Jefferson's home in Virginia. It is named Monticello. It has an eight-sided rounded roof. The roof is shown on the back of most nickels. "District of Hamilton" takes readers to many other places, too. It explores important government buildings and battlefields.

Hamilton Is A Funny Drawing In The Book

Spencer and Alden are shown on every page. They are often wearing costumes. Alexander Hamilton is pictured as a funny drawing in the book. He is called "Alex." 

All of that makes the book fun. It also comes with a surprise. There is a treasure hunt inside the book! Kids can win a prize if they answer seven questions correctly.
