Results of popular "marshmallow test" mean little, new study shows

The "marshmallow test" is popular with parents. It tests a young child's self-control. It is meant to predict if children will be successful later in life. 

A scientist named Walter Mischel conducted the first marshmallow test. He did his studies in the 1960s and 1970s at Stanford University in California. Children between 3 and 5 years old were given a marshmallow. They could eat it right away. They could also wait 10 minutes, though. If they did, they would get a reward. They would get two marshmallows instead of one.

Mischel said the study was a big deal. Children who had the self-control to wait for the extra marshmallow lived different lives, he said. As teens, they were smarter, he said. Those who ate the marshmallow right away did not do as well.

A new study has found very different results from the first marshmallow test. The new study did its own marshmallow test. It shows that the test is not as useful as some once thought.

Self-Control Can Change

Tyler Watts is an expert who worked on the new study. Waiting to eat the marshmallow does not always mean very much, he said. It shows how much self-control a child has now. It does not predict self-control later in life, though.

Mischel wrote that children with more self-control were more intelligent. They trusted their own judgment when they were older, he wrote.

Test Results Fail To Match Up

Watts does not agree. He said the test results are no longer so simple.

The new marshmallow test studied 900 children. The group of children was more like the general U.S. population. They came from different backgrounds. For example, 500 children in the study had mothers who had not gone to college.

Mischel's first study used children of the experts at Stanford University. Those children had similar backgrounds. They didn't reflect the general U.S. population as much as the new study. 

The new study shows a new result. A person's self-control may change over time, Watts said. It leaves experts with new questions to study.
