Don't despair if you ate the marshmallow right away

The "marshmallow test" has intrigued a generation of parents and education experts with its promise that a young child's willpower and self-control holds a key to their success in later life.

However, the latest research suggests that the marshmallow test is not very accurate after all.

The results, according to the researchers who carried out the new study, mean that parents, schools and nurseries could be wasting time if they try to coach their children to delay gratification by resisting the tasty confection.

Psychologist Walter Mischel carried out the original marshmallow test research in the 1960s and 1970s at Stanford University in California. Children between 3 and 5  years old were given a marshmallow that they could eat immediately, but were told that if they resisted eating it for 10 minutes, they would be rewarded with two marshmallows.

According to Mischel and co-workers in a follow-up study in 1990, the results were profound for children who had the willpower to wait for the extra marshmallow. More than a decade later, in their late teens, those children exhibited advanced traits of intelligence and behavior far above those who succumbed to temptation.

Results Not As Significant In Second Research Study

Now, though, there is relief for the parents of the many children who would gobble down a marshmallow before the lab door was closed. Researchers from New York University (NYU) and the University of California-Irvine tried and largely failed to re-create the earlier research, in a paper published in May.

The new research by Tyler Watts, Greg Duncan and Hoanan Quen was published in the journal Psychological Science. The research found that there were still benefits for the children who were able to hold out for a larger reward, but the effects were nowhere near as significant as those found by Mischel. Even those effects largely disappeared at age 15 once family and parental education were accounted for.

Watts said that the new results take into account the background characteristics of the child and their environment. Once those factors were accounted for, the marshmallow test made less of a difference. "Differences in the ability to delay gratification do not necessarily translate into meaningful differences later in life," Watts said.

"So, if you looked at our results, you probably would decide that you should not put too much stock in a child's ability to delay at an early age," Watts said.

In the decades since Mischel's work the marshmallow test has become common in parenting advice and among experts studying education and the mind. Its message is that improving a child's own ability to delay gratification would have tangible benefits.

The ones with willpower "yielded less to temptation; were less distractible when trying to concentrate; were more intelligent, self-reliant, and confident; and trusted their own judgment," Mischel later wrote.

Don't Take Results Too Seriously

However, Watts, a scholar at the Steinhardt school of culture, education and human development at NYU, says the test results are no longer so straightforward.

"I think the test is still a very illuminating measure of children's ability to delay gratification," Watts said. Watts added that Mischel's work undeniably influenced how we think about young children and their development.

"But our study suggests that the predictive ability of the test should probably not be overstated," he said. "In other words, if you are the parent of a 4 year old, and they reach for the marshmallow without waiting, you should not be too concerned."

The updated version of the marshmallow test allowed children to choose their own treats, including chocolate. The test studied 900 children. The group of children was selected to be more reflective of U.S. society. For example, 500 children in the study had mothers who had not attended college.

Mischel's original research used children of Stanford University staff. The follow-up study, on the other hand, included fewer than 50 children from which Mischel and co-workers formed their conclusions.

Not Predictive Of Teen Behavior

Most surprising, according to Watts, was that the revisited test failed to replicate the links with behavior that Mischel's work found. This means that a child's ability to resist a sweet treat at age 4 or 5 didn't necessarily lead to a well-adjusted teenager a decade later.

"We found virtually no correlation between performance on the marshmallow test and a host of adolescent behavioral outcomes. I thought that this was the most surprising finding of the paper," Watts said.

"It suggests that the ability to delay gratification, and possibly self-control, may not be a stable trait. It certainly opens up new avenues for inquiry," Watts said.

Robert Coe is a professor of education at Durham University in England. He said the marshmallow test had become so well known because it was a simple experiment with a powerful result.

"It will never die, despite being debunked, that's the problem. Parenting books 10 or 20 years from now will still be quoting it, and not the evidence against it," Coe said.
