Don't swallow results of original "marshmallow test," says new study

The "marshmallow test" has fascinated a generation of parents and education experts. The test claims that a young child's willpower and self-control is key to their success in later life.

There is some good news for parents of pre-schoolers whose impulse control is nonexistent, though. The latest research suggests that the marshmallow test is not very accurate after all.

The results, according to the new study, mean that parents, schools and nurseries could be wasting time if they try to coach their children to delay gratification.

Psychologist Walter Mischel carried out the original marshmallow test. He did his research in the 1960s and 1970s at Stanford University in California. Children between 3 and 5 years old were given a marshmallow. They were told that they could eat it immediately, but if they resisted eating it for 10 minutes, they would be rewarded with two marshmallows.

Mischel and co-workers then did a follow-up study in 1990. They said the results were significant for children who had the willpower to wait for the extra marshmallow. More than a decade later, in their late teens, those children showed advanced traits of intelligence and behavior far above those who succumbed to temptation.

Original Results Not Duplicated

Now, however, there is relief for the parents of the many children who would gobble down a marshmallow right away. Academics from New York University (NYU) and the University of California-Irvine published a new paper in May. In their research, they tried and largely failed to re-create the original marshmallow test results.

The new research is by Tyler Watts, Greg Duncan and Hoanan Quen. It was published in the journal Psychological Science. The research found that there were still benefits for the children who were able to hold out for a larger reward. However, the effects were nowhere near as significant as those found by Mischel. Even those effects largely disappeared at age 15 once family and parental education were accounted for.

Watts is an expert at the Steinhardt school of culture, education and human development at NYU. He said that the new results take into account the background characteristics of the child and their environment. Once those factors were accounted for, the marshmallow test made less of a difference. "Differences in the ability to delay gratification do not necessarily translate into meaningful differences later in life," Watts said.

In the decades since Mischel's work, the marshmallow test has become common in middle-class parenting advice and among experts studying education and the mind. Its message is that improving a child's own ability to delay gratification would have clear benefits.

The ones with willpower "yielded less to temptation; were less distractible when trying to concentrate; were more intelligent, self-reliant, and confident; and trusted their own judgment," Mischel later wrote.

However, Watts said the test results are no longer so straightforward. He said the test is still a useful measure of children's ability to delay gratification. It also influenced how we think about young children and their development, he said.

Results Not Reflected In Later Life

The new study suggests that the marshmallow test is not very accurate at predicting outcomes later in a child's life, though. "If you are the parent of a 4 year old,  and they reach for the marshmallow without waiting, you should not be too concerned," Watts said.

The updated version of the marshmallow test allowed children to choose their own treats, including chocolate. The test studied 900 children. The group of children was selected to be more reflective of U.S. society. For example, 500 children in the study had mothers who had not attended college.

Mischel's original research used children of Stanford University staff. The follow-up study, on the other hand, included fewer than 50 children belonging to the group from which Mischel and co-workers formed their conclusions.

Most surprising, according to Watts, was that the revisited test failed to replicate the links with behavior that Mischel's work found. This means that a child's ability to resist a sweet treat at age 4 or 5 didn't necessarily lead to a well-adjusted teenager a decade later.

The researchers looked at a number of behavioral outcomes when the children became teenagers. They found almost no link between these outcomes and performance on the marshmallow test, Watts said.

Self-Control Changes Over Time

"It suggests that the ability to delay gratification, and possibly self-control, may not be a stable trait," Watts said. This means that a person's level of self-control might change over their life. It leaves researchers with new questions to study.

Robert Coe is a professor of education at Durham University in England. He said the marshmallow test had become so well known because it was a simple experiment with a powerful result.

"It will never die, despite being debunked, that's the problem. Parenting books 10 or 20 years from now will still be quoting it, and not the evidence against it," Coe said.
