Self-control over time can't be predicted, new research shows

For years, the "marshmallow test" has caught the interest of parents and education experts. The test claims that a young child's self-control holds a key to success in later life.

A new study re-created the marshmallow test. It suggests that the test is not very useful after all.

The new study's results go against the original study. The results mean that parents and schools could be wasting time if they try to coach their children to have more self-control.

Psychologist Walter Mischel designed the original marshmallow test. He did his studies in the 1960s and 1970s at Stanford University in California. Children between 3 and 5  years old were given a marshmallow. They had the choice to eat it immediately. If they waited 10 minutes, though, they would get a reward. They would get two marshmallows instead of one.

Mischel said the results were a big deal. Children who had the self-control to wait for the extra marshmallow lived different lives. More than 10 years later, those children were in their late teens. At that age, they showed advanced intelligence and behavior far above those who ate the marshmallow right away.

Effects Diminish The Second Time

Now, though, parents of the many children who would eat the marshmallow right away can relax. Experts from New York University (NYU) and the University of California-Irvine published a new paper in May. Their study found very different results from the original marshmallow test.

The new study is by Tyler Watts, Greg Duncan and Hoanan Quen. It found that there were still benefits for the children who were able to hold out for a larger reward. However, the effects were nowhere near as big as those found by Mischel. Moreover, those positive effects largely disappeared by age 15.

Watts said that the new results take into account the backgrounds of the children and their environment. For example, they tracked if a child's parents went to college or not. Once those backgrounds were accounted for, the marshmallow test made less difference. Watts said that being able to hold off eating the marshmallow does not necessarily mean a lot. It does not mean a child will have more self-control later in life.

In the decades since Mischel's work, the marshmallow test has become well known. It is common in advice given to parents. It is well known to experts studying education and the mind. Its message is that improving a child's self-control would have clear benefits.

Mischel wrote that children with more willpower were more intelligent. They were self-reliant, confident and trusted their own judgment, he wrote.

Test Has Little Validity

However, Watts said the test results are no longer so simple. The test is still a useful measure of children's self-control, he said. The new study suggests that the marshmallow test is not very good at predicting self-control later in a child's life, though.

There will always be children who eat the marshmallow right away. Watts said parents should not be too concerned about it, though.

The updated marshmallow test let children choose their own treats, including chocolate. The test studied 900 children. The group of children was selected to be more reflective of U.S. society. For example, 500 children in the study had mothers who had not gone to college.

Mischel's original study used children of the experts at Stanford University. Those children had more similar backgrounds. They didn't represent the general U.S. population as much as the new study.

The new study looked at what happened when the children became teenagers. The experts wanted to see if the marshmallow test predicted how much self-control the teens had. The marshmallow test predicted almost nothing, Watts said.

The results suggest that a person's self-control may change over time, Watts said. This leaves experts with new questions to study.
