Winning letter-writers inspired by books with different messages

Two writers' books changed the lives of two students. 

Akosua Haynes, age 10, wrote to Margot Lee Shetterly, author of "Hidden Figures: The Story of the African-American Women Who Helped Win the Space Race." She told Shetterly her book confirmed Akosua's decision to become a NASA astronaut. NASA is the U.S. space agency.

Rylee Paige Johnson, age 13, wrote a letter to Gabrielle Zevin, author of "Elsewhere." She thanked Zevin for helping her heal after the death of her mother.

The letters were part of a Library of Congress contest that invites fourth- through 12th-graders to write to authors and let them know the effect of their work. The Library of Congress is in Washington, D.C. About 47,000 students from across the United States entered this year's contest.

Out of those letters, Akosua and Rylee had first-place wins. Akosua, a fifth-grader in Hyde Park, New York, won the fourth- through sixth-grade division. Rylee, a seventh-grader in Chicago, Illinois, won the seventh- and eighth-grade division.

Their letters are very different. Still, they both show the power of books to help people.

Time To Move Forward

Rylee wrote to Zevin about her mother's sudden illness and death. "I spent those few days in that hospital room listing all the things I did wrong and what I would change once she woke up. She never did."

In "Elsewhere," the character Liz ends up in a place called Elsewhere after being hit and killed by a taxi. From there, she watches her old world.

"Liz tortured herself by going to the observation decks to see her old life every day," Rylee wrote. "She sat there watching her best friend being happy without her. She watched everyone move on -- everyone except Liz. I didn't want that to happen to me. I didn't want to become a ghost person living in the past."

Rylee said the letter to Zevin was the first time she'd written much about losing her mom, who died in December 2016.

"Liz took some time learning how to move on from the life she used to know," she wrote. "She was stuck. Thandi, her roommate, had no problem at all. From the start she said there was no point being sad at what she couldn't change. I read that, wishing my heart could catch up like Thandi's did in two pages. But everyone takes their own time to keep their mind and soul in sync." She wrote that she had to accept that life would go on without her mom, but only if she moved on.

"I wanted to live my life and not wait for it to be over," Rylee wrote. "Thank you for a world where my own mother can see me writing this letter from an observation deck."

Strong Desire To Be Astronaut

Akosua has known her life's calling from a young age. She has dressed up like an astronaut "for at least four Halloweens," she said. 

Akosua and her parents traveled to Illinois to watch the solar eclipse in August 2017. She finished reading "Hidden Figures" on the drive back.

The moon blocked out the sun in the eclipse. Akosua wrote to Shetterly, "I looked up and wondered how Katherine Johnson felt when she helped John Glenn orbit the Earth." Johnson was in Shetterly's book.

Akosua threw a "Hidden Figures"-themed birthday party, but only for those who had read the book.

"You had to be two-thirds done with the book, or you just couldn't come," she said.

She told Shetterly about it, writing, "I wanted them to read your book to see the magic in math and how useful it can be." 

Akosua also wrote that although the astronaut Glenn respected Johnson, they lived in different worlds because African-Americans were discriminated against. They were treated differently because of their skin color. "I asked myself if I would have been able to work so well under pressure."

The Library of Congress doesn't send the letters to the authors, as the purpose is to show the power of a story. The winning letters are on the library's website.

Still, Akosua's hoping her letter makes its way to Shetterly.

"I really want her to know how much her book inspired me," she said. And how it motivated her to improve her math skills.
