Winning words: Books make big impact on these letter-writers

Sometimes a book can change a person's life.  

Akosua Haynes. age 10, wrote a letter to Margot Lee Shetterly. She is the writer of "Hidden Figures: The Story of the African-American Women Who Helped Win the Space Race." Akosua told Shetterly her book made her even more sure she wanted to be a NASA astronaut. NASA is the U.S. space agency.

Rylee Paige Johnson, age 13, wrote a letter to Gabrielle Zevin, author of "Elsewhere." She thanked Zevin for assisting her after the death of her mother.

The letters were part of a Library of Congress contest. The Library of Congress is in Washington, D.C. The contest invites students to write to authors and let them know how their work impacted them. About 47,000 students from across the United States entered this year's contest.

Out of those letters, Akosua and Rylee had first-place wins. Akosua is a fifth-grader in Hyde Park, New York. Rylee is a seventh-grader in Chicago, Illinois. They each won their age group. 

Their letters are opposites. One is sad and the other is happy. Still, they both show the power of books.

Accepting Her Mom's Death

Rylee wrote to Zevin about her mother's illness and death. "I spent those few days in that hospital room listing all the things I did wrong and what I would change once she woke up. She never did."

In "Elsewhere," the character Liz ends up in a place called Elsewhere after being hit and killed by a car. From there, she watches her old world.

Liz made herself sad by going to see her old life every day, Rylee wrote. "She sat there watching her best friend being happy without her. She watched everyone move on -- everyone except Liz. I didn't want that to happen to me. I didn't want to become a ghost person living in the past."

Rylee said the letter to Zevin was the first time she had written much about losing her mother. Her mom died in December 2016.

"Liz took some time learning how to move on from the life she used to know," she wrote. "She was stuck." Rylee wrote that she had to accept that life would go on without her mom.

"I wanted to live my life and not wait for it to be over," Rylee wrote. "Thank you for a world where my own mother can see me writing this letter."

Math Is Magic To Her

Akosua always knew what she wanted to be when she grew up. She has dressed up like an astronaut "for at least four Halloweens," she said. 

Akosua and her parents traveled to Illinois to watch the solar eclipse in August 2017. She finished reading "Hidden Figures" on the drive back.

The moon blocked out the sun in the eclipse. Akosua wrote to Shetterly, "I looked up and wondered how Katherine Johnson felt when she helped John Glenn orbit the Earth." Johnson was in Shetterly's book, and Glenn was an astronaut.

Akosua threw a "Hidden Figures"-themed birthday party, but only for those who had read the book.

"You had to be two-thirds done with the book, or you just couldn't come," she said.

She told Shetterly about it. "I wanted them to read your book to see the magic in math and how useful it can be," she wrote. 

Akosua wrote that although Glenn respected Johnson, they lived in different worlds as African-Americans were discriminated against. They were treated differently because of their skin color. "I asked myself if I would have been able to work so well under pressure."

The Library of Congress does not send the letters to the authors, as the purpose is to show the power of a story. The winning letters are on the library's website.

Akosua hopes Shetterly hears about her letter. She wants her to know what the book means to her.
