These books hold great meaning to these winning letter-writers

Books can change people's lives. Some students really enjoyed reading certain books. So they wrote letters to the people who wrote the books. 

Akosua Haynes, age 10, wrote a letter to Margot Lee Shetterly. Shetterly wrote a book called "Hidden Figures: The Story of the African-American Women Who Helped Win the Space Race." 

She liked Shetterly's book about space because she wants to become a NASA astronaut.  NASA is the U.S. space agency.

Rylee Paige Johnson, age 13, wrote a letter to Gabrielle Zevin. Zevin is the author of a book called "Elsewhere." Rylee thanked Zevin for helping her after her mother died.

The letters were part of a contest. It was held by the Library of Congress. The Library of Congress is in  Washington, D.C. The contest invites students to write to authors about their books. Students from across the United States entered the contest.

Out of those letters, Akosua and Rylee had first-place wins. Akosua is in fifth grade in Hyde Park, New York. Rylee is in seventh grade in Chicago, Illinois. They each won for their age group. 

One of Sorrow and One Of Joy

Their letters are opposites. One is sad and the other is happy. Still, they both show the power of books.

Rylee wrote to Zevin about her mother's illness and death. She died suddenly.

Zevin's book has a girl named Liz. She ends up in a place called Elsewhere after being hit by a car. From there, she watches her old world.

Rylee wrote about Liz in her letter. Liz was sad because she kept watching her old life. Rylee wrote that she did not want to live in the past. 

"Liz took some time learning how to move on from the life she used to know," she wrote. "She was stuck." Rylee wrote that she had to accept that life would go on without her mom.

Akosua has planned to be an astronaut from a young age.  

Akosua had a birthday party with a "Hidden Figures" theme. It was only for friends who had read most of the book.

She told Shetterly about it. "I wanted them to read your book to see the magic in math," she wrote. 

Stories Behind The Letters

The Library of Congress does not send the letters to the authors. The letters are just to show the power of a story. The winning letters are on the library's website.

Akosua hopes Shetterly hears about her letter. She wants her to know what the book means to her.
