Books inspire winning letters: One is of triumph, the other of tragedy

Akosua Haynes, age 10, wrote to Margot Lee Shetterly, author of "Hidden Figures: The Story of the African-American Women Who Helped Win the Space Race." She told Shetterly her book solidified Akosua's decision to become a NASA astronaut.

Rylee Paige Johnson wrote a letter to Gabrielle Zevin, author of "Elsewhere," thanking Zevin for helping her heal after the death of her mother.

The letters were part of a Library of Congress writing contest that invites fourth- through 12th-graders to write to authors and let them know the effect of their work. The Library of Congress is in Washington, D.C. About 47,000 students from across the United States entered this year's contest.

Out of those letters, Akosua and Rylee each had first-place wins. Akosua, a fifth-grader in Hyde Park, New York, won the fourth- through sixth-grade division. Rylee, a seventh-grader in Chicago, Illinois, won the seventh- and eighth-grade division.

Their letters are opposites, one sad and one joyful, but they share a truth of the power of books to guide us through triumphs and troubles.

Not Trapped In The Past

"One night my siblings and parents were in the living room watching our favorite show," Rylee, age 13, wrote to Zevin. "A commercial came on so I got up to make cookies in the kitchen. Then my oldest sister, Sydney, started whispering, 'Mom? Mom?' No answer. I looked over to see my dad standing over a shaking body. 'I'm calling 911!' I spent those few days in that hospital room listing all the things I did wrong and what I would change once she woke up. She never did."

In Zevin's book, the character Liz ends up in a place called Elsewhere after being hit and killed by a taxi, and from there, she watches her old world.

"Liz tortured herself by going to the observation decks to see her old life every day," Rylee wrote, continuing, "She sat there watching her best friend being happy without her. She watched everyone move on - everyone except Liz. I didn't want that to happen to me. I didn't want to become a ghost person living in the past."

Rylee said the letter to Zevin was the first time she'd written much about losing her mom, who passed away in December 2016.

"Liz took some time learning how to move on from the life she used to know," she wrote. "She was stuck. Thandi, her roommate, had no problem at all. From the start she said there was no point being sad at what she couldn't change. I read that, wishing my heart could catch up like Thandi's did in two pages. But everyone takes their own time to keep their mind and soul in sync." She wrote that she had to accept that life would go on without her mom, but only if she moved on.

"I wanted to live my life and not wait for it to be over," Rylee wrote. "Thank you for a world where my own mother can see me writing this letter from an observation deck."

Rylee was asked if she wants to pursue writing, and she said she would love it as a career. 

"It felt really good to tell my story, so that other people could read it and maybe be inspired or just feel better about their own losses in life."

She Knows What She Wants To Be

Akosua has known her life's calling from a young age, having dressed up like an astronaut "for at least four Halloweens now," she said. 

Akosua and her parents traveled to Illinois to watch the solar eclipse in August 2017, and she finished reading "Hidden Figures" on the drive back.

"When the moon had completely covered the sun, I looked up and wondered how Katherine Johnson felt when she helped John Glenn orbit the Earth," Akosua wrote to Shetterly. Johnson was in Shetterly's book.

Akosua threw a "Hidden Figures"-themed birthday party, but only for those who had read the book.

"You had to be two-thirds done with the book, or you just couldn't come," she said.

She told Shetterly about it, writing, "I wanted them to read your book to see the magic in math and how useful it can be." 

Akosua also wrote that although the astronaut Glenn respected Johnson, they lived in different worlds because African-Americans were discriminated against. They were treated differently because of their skin color. "I asked myself if I would have been able to work so well under pressure."

The Library of Congress doesn't send the letters to the authors, as the purpose is to show the power of a story. The winning letters are on the library's website.

Still, Akosua's hoping her letter makes its way to Shetterly.

"I really want her to know how much her book inspired me," she said. And how it motivated her to improve her math skills.
