Parkland students spread the word about drama teacher's Tony Award

PARKLAND, Florida — Melody Herzfeld wondered if she had heard correctly when she got the news about her Tony Award.

Herzfeld teaches drama at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland. There was an attack there on February 14. Seventeen people were killed in the attack. Just before Mother's Day, she got the call that she would receive the 2018 Excellence in Theatre Education Tony Award.

"A strange number came across my cellphone while I was in class taking attendance," Herzfeld recalls. "And this voice says, 'Can you please hold for the Broadway League?' And I'm thinking, 'OK, what is this about?' Then, the president (of the League) got on the phone and introduced herself and yada, yada, yada 'Tony Award,' and my jaw just dropped. Everything ended when I heard 'Tony Award.' I don't think I heard another word. And then, it was followed up with an email, thank God, because I wouldn't have remembered anything."

Students Perform At Tony Awards

Herzfeld attended the 72nd annual Tony Awards on June 10 in New York City. Her students performed "Seasons of Love" from the musical, "Rent." Herzfeld's award came with $10,000 for the theater program at her school and two tickets to the Tonys.

Herzfeld has been teaching at Stoneman Douglas since 2003 and has produced more than 50 shows there. 

The groups presenting the award asked her to keep it a secret, so she put the Tony Award on the back burner. Then, on May 31, a press release announcing her award went out.

Online Announcement

"I just kind of put it in the back of my mind," she says. "I thought, 'Maybe I heard what this woman said to me wrong.'" Then one day, a student at school saw the announcement online. Students started crying and texting each other.   

"It was like Christmas for my kids. Then, they got busy. Two of them are taking phone calls for me. Two are fielding emails. One was answering the phone calls from my desk phone."

Herzfeld says the best part of the award was that "it's like it happened to them." It wasn't about her as much as it was about "their teacher," she says, calling it "magical."

Gun Control Movement To Stop School Shootings

The students did not want an attack like the one at their school to happen at another school. So they have started a movement run by students. They want more gun control. Several of these student leaders are Herzfeld's students. They include Cameron Kasky, Alex Wind, Alfonso Calderon, Chris Grady and Daniel Williams. Herzfeld says being in theater has helped the student activists say what they feel. Still, she doesn't like to share her opinions.

"I have to be a teacher first, pose questions and open the discussion for everybody," she says. "You can't sit here and preach to your children. You have to help them explore what they believe in and support it no matter what your beliefs are."

Messages From Reporters

Herzfeld hasn't given interviews until now. That is partly because during the shooting, while she and her students were hiding from the gunman, she got messages from reporters.

"They were asking me for an interview in the middle of one of the worst days of my life. I remember they were appealing to me, saying it was my obligation to answer and say that we were safe hiding in this closet," Herzfeld recalls. "I understand that is journalism and that is their job, but what bothered me was that wasn't the end of it." They continued to ask, she says. "They were really trying to guilt me into giving information about my children."

A Lesson Kids Bring Back To Their School

A better experience followed in March at the Florida State Thespian Festival in Tampa. She says all of the students there supported her school. They all wore Marjory Stoneman T-shirts. "These kids, between the ages of 14 and 18, they are banding together."

It's a lesson they brought back to their Parkland school.

"Kids today, they don't really take 'no' for an answer," Herzfeld says. "We've taught them to be persistent. We do that in drama class. Be truthful, be honest, tell me what you really think and don't fake it. The best performances are the honest ones."
