At Parkland school, tears and cheers for drama teacher's Tony Award

PARKLAND, Florida — Melody Herzfeld was teaching a drama class when she found out she was getting a Tony Award for teaching drama.

Herzfeld teaches at Marjory Stoneman Douglas (MSD) High School in Parkland, the scene of a school shooting on Valentine's Day. Just before Mother's Day, she got the call that she was going to receive the 2018 Excellence in Theatre Education Tony Award.

"A strange number came across my cellphone while I was in class taking attendance," Herzfeld recalls. "And this voice says, 'Can you please hold for the Broadway League?' And I'm thinking, 'OK, what is this about?' Then, the president (of the League) got on the phone and introduced herself and yada, yada, yada 'Tony Award,' and my jaw just dropped. Everything ended when I heard 'Tony Award.' I don't think I heard another word. And then, it was followed up with an email, thank God, because I wouldn't have remembered anything."

Tony Award And $10,000 For School

Herzfeld attended the 72nd annual Tony Awards Sunday, June 10, in New York City. Her students performed "Seasons of Love" from the musical, "Rent." Herzfeld's award came with $10,000 for the theater program at Stoneman Douglas and two tickets to the Tonys and the post-show party.

A Badge Of Honor

"I guess I'll go to Nordstrom and get a dress," Herzfeld said a few days before the award show. "That will be very exciting, to feel good for a second. We've been wearing our school shirts here like a badge of honor every day."

Herzfeld has been teaching at Stoneman Douglas since 2003 and has produced more than 50 shows at the school. 

Because she has been busy and because the organizations giving her the award — the American Theatre Wing, the Broadway League and Carnegie Mellon University — asked her to keep it a secret, she put the Tony Award on the back burner. Then, on May 31, a press release announcing her award went out.

Press Release Greeted With Tears

"I just kind of put it in the back of my mind," she says. "I thought, 'Maybe I heard what this woman said to me wrong.'" Then one day, a student at school saw the announcement online, and the students started crying and texting other classmates.   

"It was like Christmas for my kids. Then, they got busy. Two of them are taking phone calls for me. Two are fielding emails. One was answering the phone calls from my desk phone. A few rushed up to the front office to make sure an announcement went out before school let out for the day."

Herzfeld says the best part of the award was that "it's like it happened to them." It wasn't about her as much as it was about "their teacher," she says, calling it "magical."

Leading Gun Control Efforts In Wake Of School Shooting

Several of the students who have been leading efforts for gun control in the wake of the February 14 shooting are Herzfeld's students. They include Cameron Kasky, Alex Wind, Alfonso Calderon, Chris Grady, Daniel Williams, John Barnitt and Adam Alhanti. Herzfeld acknowledges that performing-arts training has helped the students become well-spoken advocates. Still, she is careful about sharing her opinions.

"I have to be a teacher first, pose questions and open the discussion for everybody," she says. "You can't sit here and preach to your children. You have to help them explore what they believe in and support it no matter what your beliefs are."

Bothered By Reporters

Herzfeld hasn't given interviews in part because during the shooting, while she and her students were hiding from the gunman, she got messages from reporters.

"They were asking me for an interview in the middle of one of the worst days of my life. I remember they were appealing to me, saying it was my obligation to answer and say that we were safe hiding in this closet," Herzfeld recalls. "I understand that is journalism and that is their job, but what bothered me was that wasn't the end of it. They asked me to FaceTime. They were really trying to guilt me into giving information about my children."

A better experience followed in March at the Florida State Thespian Festival in Tampa, which she says about 8,000 kids attended. "Every single kid, they all wore our shirts, they were all MSD strong. These kids, between the ages of 14 and 18, they are banding together."

It's a lesson they brought back to their Parkland school.

"Kids today, they don't really take 'no' for an answer," Herzfeld says. "We've taught them to be persistent. We do that in drama class — be truthful, be honest, tell me what you really think and don't fake it. The best performances are the honest ones."
