Parkland students thrilled by drama teacher's Tony Award

PARKLAND, Florida — In May, Melody Herzfeld got a surprising phone call. The caller said that she would receive a Tony Award. She wondered if she had heard correctly.

Herzfeld teaches drama at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland. The school was attacked on February 14. Seventeen people died in the attack. 

Herzfeld has been teaching at Stoneman Douglas since 2003. She has led more than 50 shows there. 

In May, she found out she would get the Excellence in Theatre Education Tony Award. The Tony awards are given to the best Broadway musicals and theater performances.

Drama Teacher Surprised To Win Award

Herzfeld was surprised to hear the caller mention the award. 

"Everything ended when I heard 'Tony Award,'" she says. "I don't think I heard another word. And then, it was followed up with an email, thank God, because I wouldn't have remembered anything."

Herzfeld attended the 72nd annual Tony Awards on June 10 in New York City. Her students performed "Seasons of Love" from the musical, "Rent." Herzfeld's award came with $10,000 for the theater program at her school.

The groups presenting the award asked her to keep it a secret, so she didn't really think about it. Then, on May 31, her award was announced.

Students Started Crying

"I just kind of put it in the back of my mind," she says. "I thought, 'Maybe I heard what this woman said to me wrong.'" Then one day, a student at school saw the announcement online. Students started crying.   

"It was like Christmas for my kids. Then, they got busy. Two of them are taking phone calls for me. Two are fielding emails. One was answering the phone calls from my desk phone."

Herzfeld says the best part of the award was that it was "like it happened to them." It was about the students because it was about their teacher, she says, calling it "magical."

Movement Started By Students To Prevent School Attacks

The students did not want an attack like the one at their school to happen at another school. So they have started a movement run by students. They want more gun control. Several of these student leaders are Herzfeld's students. They include Cameron Kasky, Alex Wind, Alfonso Calderon, Chris Grady and Daniel Williams. Herzfeld says being in theater has helped the student activists say what they feel. Still, she doesn't like to share her opinions.

"I have to be a teacher first" and ask questions and open the talk for everybody, she says. "You can't sit here and preach to your children. You have to help them explore what they believe in and support it no matter what your beliefs are."

Herzfeld has not talked to the news until now. That is partly because reporters bothered her during the attack, while she and her students were hiding from the gunman. Reporters kept sending messages to her.

"They were asking me for an interview in the middle of one of the worst days of my life," Herzfeld says. They pushed her to answer questions, she says. "I understand that is journalism and that is their job, but what bothered me was that wasn't the end of it." They kept asking, she says. "They were really trying to guilt me into giving information about my children."

Banding Together At Florida State Festival

A better experience came in March at the Florida State Thespian Festival in Tampa, Florida. She says all of the students there supported her school. They all wore Marjory Stoneman T-shirts. "These kids, between the ages of 14 and 18, they are banding together," she says.

It is a lesson they brought back to their Parkland school.

"Kids today, they don't really take 'no' for an answer," Herzfeld says. Adults have taught them to keep trying. "We do that in drama class. Be truthful, be honest, tell me what you really think and don't fake it. The best performances are the honest ones."
