Parkland drama teacher wins Tony Award

PARKLAND, Florida — Melody Herzfeld teaches drama. She also leads students in putting on musical and theater shows. 

Herzfeld got a surprising phone call in May. The caller said that she would receive a Tony Award.

The Tony Awards are given to the best Broadway musicals and theater performances.

Herzfeld teaches at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland. There was an attack on the school on February 14. Seventeen people were killed in the attack.

Herzfeld has been teaching there since 2003. She has led more than 50 shows there. 

Teacher At Florida High School Wins Tony Award

On the call in May, she was told she would get a Tony Award. It is for teaching drama.

Herzfeld was surprised to hear the caller talk about the award. 

"Everything ended when I heard 'Tony Award,'" she says. She does not think she heard anything after that. 

Herzfeld attended the 72nd annual Tony Awards on June 10 in New York City. Her students sang the song "Seasons of Love" from the musical, "Rent." 

Herzfeld's award came with $10,000 for her school.

Asked To Keep Award A Secret

The groups giving the award asked her to keep it a secret. So she forgot about it for a bit.

"I just kind of put it in the back of my mind," she says. "I thought, 'Maybe I heard what this woman said to me wrong.'" 

One day, a student at school saw online that she had won the award. Students started crying.   

"It was like Christmas for my kids," she says.

Herzfeld says the best part of the award was that it was "like it happened to them." It was about the students because it was about their teacher, she says. She called it "magical."

Student Activists Say What They Feel

The students did not want an attack like the one at their school to happen at another school. So they have started a movement run by students. They want more gun control. Some of these student leaders are Herzfeld's students. Herzfeld says being in theater has helped the student activists say what they feel. Still, she doesn't like to share her opinions.

Herzfeld has not talked to the news until now. That is partly because reporters bothered her during the shooting. It was while she and her students were hiding from the gunman. Reporters kept sending messages to her.

They pushed her to answer questions, she says. She understands that is their job, she says. The problem was that they kept asking. 

Kids At Florida Festival Supported School

A better time came in March at the Florida State Thespian Festival. She says the students there supported her school. They all wore Marjory Stoneman T-shirts. The kids are working together, she says.

It is a lesson they brought back to their Parkland school.

"Kids today, they don't really take 'no' for an answer," Herzfeld says. Grown-ups have taught them to keep trying, she says.
