Opinion: Like the first one, "Incredibles 2" is a great superhero movie

"Incredibles 2" is the long-awaited Disney/Pixar follow-up movie. "The Incredibles" is still among the best superhero movies around. The new movie is a leather-gloved and mask-wearing knockout. It is an excellent and exciting movie. 

It shows animated superhero adventures can still be incredible. This animated movie is as good as today's live-action superhero movies and TV shows. Live-action movies use real people. These actors play the characters. Animated movies, or cartoons, are made using computers. 

"The Incredibles" hit theaters in 2004. At the time, live-action superhero movies were very new. Superhero cartoons were still the favorites.

There are way more superheroes on screen these days. With so many live-action superhero choices, do the Incredibles still matter?

The answer is yes.

A Fresh And Fun Movie

"Incredibles 2" has the same likable characters. Their voices are played by great actors. The movie also has catchy music.

"Incredibles 2" took more than 10 years to make. It still feels fresh, though. There's plenty of fun. There are lots of laughs. There are also surprisingly exciting adventures. Youngsters who may not have seen the first film will not miss out. They can follow along easily.

Elastigirl leads the way. The story takes place at a time when being a superhero is still against the law. Nevertheless, the family's mom is called upon to save the day. She tries to bring superheroes back on the good side of the government. The government no longer thinks superheroes help.

The Struggles Of Superhero Life

Mr. Incredible was not asked to be a part of his wife's efforts. That leaves him at home with his superpowered kids. This creates most of the laughs in "Incredibles 2." Many laughs also come once everyone realizes baby Jack-Jack has superpowers too.

The family trials are still the heart of the movie. The teenage daughter is named Violet. She wants nothing to do with anyone. The boy Dash would be hyper all the time if not for super-speed. Baby brother Jack-Jack has the power to do about anything he wants. Mr. Incredible has a hard time staying at home. He wants to be a hero like his wife.

"Incredibles 2" proves cartoons can be great superhero movies. This one is a must-see. It was worth the wait.
