Opinion: After a long wait, "Incredibles 2" movie arrives with a "POW!"

"Incredibles 2" is the long-awaited Disney/Pixar follow-up movie. The original "The Incredibles" is still among the best superhero movies around. The new movie is a leather-gloved and domino-mask-wearing knockout punch. It is an excellent and exciting movie. 

Anyone who thought animated superhero adventures no longer mean much is wrong. This animated movie is just as good as today's live-action superhero movies and TV shows using real people to play the characters.

"The Incredibles" hit theaters in 2004. At the time, the modern world of superhero movies was just getting started.

Sony and Fox were leading the way with Spider-Man and X-Men. Yet the idea of connected Marvel movies was still a dream for Kevin Feige. He's the president of Marvel Studios, the motion picture studio behind the hugely successful "Black Panther" and "Avengers" movies. 

In the early 2000s, superhero cartoons were still a heavyweight. "Batman: The Animated Series," "Justice League" and the 1990s Saturday-morning "X-Men" were favorites.

Many More Superheroes These Days

There are way more superheroes on screen these days. Marvel Studios is the undisputed king of movies adapted from comics. DC and Warner Bros. also created a hit with "Wonder Woman." In addition, the success of "Deadpool" means Fox won't let go of the X-Men anytime soon.

With so many live-action superhero choices, do the Incredibles still matter?

The answer to that question is yes, with an added "pow." 

"Incredibles 2" returns with its lovable cast of characters and top-notch voice talent. It also has catchy music.

Even though it took more than a decade to make, "Incredibles 2" doesn't feel dated. There's plenty of fun, laughs and surprisingly exciting action. Youngsters who may not have seen the first film won't miss out. They'll be able to follow along easily.

Just Your Average Superhero Family

Elastigirl, voiced by Holly Hunter, leads the way. It is a time when being a superhero is still against the law. Nevertheless, this mom is called upon to save the day. She tries to bring superheroes back into the good graces of a government that doesn't trust them.

Mr. Incredible, voiced by Craig T. Nelson, wasn't asked to be a part of her superhero efforts. That leaves him no choice but to stay at home with his superpowered kids. The situation creates most of the laughs in "Incredibles 2." Many of these laughs come once everyone realizes baby Jack-Jack has superpowers too.

The family stress continues to be the heart of these movies. A teenage daughter, Violet, wants nothing to do with anyone. Dash would be hyper all the time if he didn't have super-speed. Fortunately, he does. Baby brother Jack-Jack has the power to do just about whatever he wants. Mr. Incredible struggles to sit on the bench with his mask off while his wife gets to be in the public eye.

A Successful Sequel

Samuel L. Jackson is also back as Frozone. You half-expect his character, powered by Jackson's unmistakable voice, to call in the Avengers. He plays Nick Fury in those movies. Hey, "Incredibles 2" is a Disney movie, and Marvel is part of Disney, so they could probably make it happen. Yet this superhero universe is exciting enough that extra superheroes aren't needed.

It's a wonder we live in a world where several not-so-great Fantastic Four movies exist. Meanwhile, the Incredibles can just dust itself off after so many years. The movie again shows Hollywood how it's done.

Everything "Incredibles 2" needed to do, it does. The follow-up reestablishes a Pixar/superhero movie world with plenty of life left. The movie also proves cartoons are still a force in superhero entertainment. "Teen Titans Go!" and Sony's animated Spider-Man movies will be coming out soon. They should be thankful this movie arrived before them.

"Incredibles 2" is a must-see and worth the wait.
