Opinion: "Incredibles" sequel is here, and it's well worth the wait

"Incredibles 2" is the long-awaited Disney/Pixar sequel movie. The original "The Incredibles" is still one of the best superhero movies around. Now, the new movie is a leather-gloved and domino-mask-wearing knockout punch to the idea that animated superhero adventures don't mean much in this era of live-action comic book movies and TV shows.

When "The Incredibles" hit theaters in 2004, the modern world of superhero movies was just getting started.

Sony and Fox were leading the way with their Spider-Man and X-Men movies at the time. Yet the idea of connected Marvel movies was still a dream for Kevin Feige, president of Marvel Studios. Superhero cartoons were still a heavyweight, with "Batman: The Animated Series," "Justice League" and the '90s Saturday-morning "X-Men" cartoon favorites to many.

There are way more superheroes on screen these days. Marvel Studios, with its recent hit "Black Panther," is the undisputed king of comic book movies. DC and Warner Bros., despite missteps, created a cultural phenomenon in "Wonder Woman." In addition, the success of "Deadpool" means Fox won't let go of the X-Men anytime soon.

With so many live-action superhero options, do the Incredibles still matter?

The answer to that question is yes, with a "pow" for good measure.

Lovable Characters And Good Music

"Incredibles 2" returns with its lovable cast of characters and top-notch voice talent. It also has snazzy and snappy music loaded with the musical equivalent of onomatopoeia. These are word sounds like "pow," "bang" and "boom."

Despite being a movie that took more than a decade to make, "Incredibles 2" doesn't feel dated. There's plenty of fun, laughs and (surprisingly intense) action. Youngsters who may not have seen the first film aren't punished for missing it — they'll be able to follow along easily.

Elastigirl (voiced by Holly Hunter) leads the way in a time when being a superhero is still against the law. The family's lead heroine and mom is called upon to save the day. She tries to bring superheroes back into the good graces of a government that doesn't trust them.

That leaves Mr. Incredible (voiced by Craig T. Nelson) — who wasn't asked to be a part of these superhero efforts — no choice but to stay at home with his superpowered kids. This situation generates moments that provide "Incredibles 2" with most of its laughs. Many of these laughs come once everyone realizes that baby Jack-Jack has superpowers too.

Family Is At The Center Of The Movie

The family drama continues to be the heart of these movies. A teenage daughter, Violet (voiced by Sarah Vowell), wants nothing to do with anyone. Dash (Huck Milner) would be hyper all the time if he didn't have super-speed (which he does). Baby brother Jack-Jack (Eli Fucile) has the power to do just about whatever he wants, and Mr. Incredible struggles to sit on the bench with his mask off while his wife gets to be in the public eye.

Samuel L. Jackson is also back as Frozone. You half-expect his character, powered by Jackson's unmistakable voice, to call in the Avengers. He plays Nick Fury in those movies. Hey, "Incredibles 2" is under the Disney umbrella — they could probably make it happen — but this superhero universe is entertaining enough that extra "suits" aren't needed.

It's a wonder we live in a world where several not-so-great Fantastic Four movies exist. Meanwhile, the Incredibles can just dust itself off after so many years and show Hollywood how it's done.

Everything "Incredibles 2" needed to do, it does. The follow-up reestablishes a Pixar/superhero movie world that still has plenty of life left in it while also proving cartoons are still a force in superhero entertainment. The upcoming "Teen Titans Go!" and Sony's animated Spider-Man movies should be thankful this movie arrived when it did.

"Incredibles 2" is a must-see and worth the wait.
