"Jurassic Park" film feeds curiosity about dinosaurs and paleontology

Jordan Mallon had many ideas about what he wanted to be when he grew up. He had dreams of being a hockey player or perhaps an artist. He was also fascinated by dinosaurs.

In the summer of 1993, Jordan's father took him to see "Jurassic Park." After the lights came up in the movie theater, 11-year-old Jordan could see his future, and that night, he told his mother, "I want to be a paleontologist."

Paleontologists are scientists who study fossils. Many paleontologists study dinosaurs, so their field got a major boost from the movie. 

"That was a turning point. That movie really struck a chord with me," recalls Mallon, now a dinosaur paleontologist at the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa.

After "Jurassic Park" premiered June 11, 1993, tens of millions of people flocked to movie theaters to see the captivating creatures that once roamed the planet. The film ignited public interest in dinosaurs and paleontology. This popularity set off a sequence of events that would bring a flood of new scientists and kick off a golden age of dinosaur discoveries.

"Paleontology as a field owes a huge debt of gratitude to 'Jurassic Park.' I think our field would be very, very different today if 'Jurassic Park' had never happened," says Steve Brusatte, a paleontologist at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. 

In 2013, the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology presented filmmaker Steven Spielberg with an award to recognize the effect the movie has had on the field.

Twenty-five years later, the "Jurassic Park" brand is still thrilling audiences, as the fifth film in the series, "Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom," hit theaters Friday, June 22.

Revolutionizing Dinosaurs

Dinosaurs were once seen as slow, stupid monsters that were evolutionary losers not worthy of study because they had no descendants alive today. For years they were seen as boring. When a young Jack Horner, a paleontologist who later advised "Jurassic Park" filmmakers, told a professor that he wanted to study dinosaurs, he was laughed at.

Yet a revival of interest in dinosaurs in the 1960s gave rise to a new scientific view of dinosaurs as active and intelligent animals that were relatives of modern birds. That new understanding set the stage for Michael Crichton's 1990 novel, "Jurassic Park." The film version brought the vision of dinosaurs as lively creatures to life with computer-generated images.

"They weren't monsters and they weren't cartoons," says Victoria Arbour, a researcher at the Royal Ontario Museum and University of Toronto. The film "emphasized dinosaurs as real living creatures that were animals that lived on Earth," she says.

Beyond Child's Play

These prehistoric movie stars energized moviegoers to learn more about real dinosaurs. 

One of the best things that "Jurassic Park" did was to feed curiosity about dinosaurs, says Mary Schweitzer, a paleontologist at North Carolina State University in Raleigh.

Before the film, there were not many books and toys, and museum exhibits had largely gone without updates for half a century.

More books came out after the movie. Scientific studies about dinosaurs received more press, paleontologists published more papers, universities began offering courses on dinosaurs, and many museums hired dinosaur specialists for the very first time.

For some dinosaur fans, paleontology's new place in the spotlight played a role in turning a childlike fascination into a more serious interest.

Andrew Farke discovered the appeal of dinosaurs as a 4-year-old and was known in his small South Dakota hometown as "the dinosaur kid." So when "Jurassic Park" came out when he was 12, the discussions that followed crystallized his interest.

"It was about that time that I transitioned from being a casual dinosaur fan – I read lots of books – to really thinking that I wanted to be a paleontologist," recalls Farke. He is now curator of paleontology at the Raymond M. Alf Museum of Paleontology in Claremont, California.

A Golden Age For Dinosaur Science

"Jurassic Park" didn't just make the dinosaurs popular. It made the scientists who study them cool, too. 

The film includes a strong female character, a scientist named Ellie Sattler, portrayed by Laura Dern.

"Having both a male and a female paleontologist in the movie was really important," says Arbour. It wasn't just Sattler's presence that mattered, she says. "She's presented as very normal. It's not weird that she's a woman and doing science."

The surge of scientists entering the field after "Jurassic Park" helped usher in a wave of new discoveries. From 1984 to 1994, about 15 new dinosaur species were named each year. That number has risen to about 50, and some have called this a golden age of discovery.

A Gateway To Science

Some paleontologists see the dinosaur frenzy stirred up by the "Jurassic Park" movies as a "double-edged sword," says Ali Nabavizadeh, an assistant professor of anatomy at Cooper Medical School of Rowan University in Camden, New Jersey. It's because not all of the dinosaurs are shown accurately in the films. "It hypes people up about dinosaurs, but then the kids start believing certain things about how a dinosaur looks or how dinosaurs lived that are not necessarily true."

Still, dinosaurs can be a gateway to science. "If you use dinosaurs correctly, you feed the hunger for how we do science," says Schweitzer.

That's what happened for Nabavizadeh as a child. After seeing "Jurassic Park" as a 6-year-old, "the excitement I got in seeing the dinosaurs alive and in the flesh made me start to wonder, was this really what they looked like?" he says. 

Something similar happened for Thomas Adams. He was 25 and managing record stores when the film came out, and all of the interest prompted him to change careers.

"People don't believe me when I say it, (but) I became a paleontologist because of 'Jurassic Park,'" says Adams. He is now curator of paleontology and geology at the Witte Museum in San Antonio, Texas.

Adams had disliked school, but "Jurassic Park" sparked a curiosity he had never experienced.

"I found that if you have this passion for something, everything else you learn is so important and so relevant to what you're doing that it makes it fun to learn," Adams says. "I rediscovered learning."
