"Jurassic Park" brings dinosaurs to life, fuels interest in paleontology

Growing up, Jordan Mallon had dreams of being a hockey player or an artist. He also was interested in dinosaurs.

Then, in 1993, Jordan's father took him to see the movie, "Jurassic Park." He was 11 years old. That night, he told his mother, "I want to be a paleontologist."

A paleontologist is a scientist who studies fossils, the remains of ancient life. Fossils have been preserved by natural processes. Skeletons are an example.

Many paleontologists study dinosaurs. They look for fossils that show clues about dinosaurs and how they lived. 

"Movie Really Struck A Chord With Me"

Mallon says the movie was eye-opening. "That movie really struck a chord with me," he recalls. Now, Mallon is a dinosaur paleontologist at the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa, Canada.

After "Jurassic Park" opened in June 1993, millions of people flocked to theaters. The film sparked interest in dinosaurs and paleontology. This popularity brought a flood of new scientists and began a new age of discoveries.

"Paleontology as a field owes a huge debt of gratitude to 'Jurassic Park.' I think our field would be very, very different today if 'Jurassic Park' had never happened," says Steve Brusatte. He is a paleontologist at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. 

In 2013, the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology presented filmmaker Steven Spielberg with an award. It was to recognize the effect the movie has had on the field.

"Jurassic Park" stories are still thrilling audiences. The fifth film in the series, "Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom," opened on Friday, June 22. 

Different View Of Dinosaurs

Dinosaurs were once seen as slow, stupid monsters that were not worth studying. For years they were considered boring. 

Yet, a revival of interest in the 1960s brought a new view of dinosaurs as intelligent animals. That understanding set the stage for Michael Crichton's 1990 book, "Jurassic Park." Then, the film version brought dinosaurs to life with computer images.

"They weren't monsters and they weren't cartoons," says Victoria Arbour. She is a scientist at the Royal Ontario Museum and University of Toronto in Canada. The film showed dinosaurs as "real living creatures that were animals that lived on Earth," she says.

Beyond Child's Play

The ancient movie stars got people excited to learn more about real dinosaurs. 

Before the film, there were not many dinosaur books and toys. Museum exhibits had mostly gone without updates for 50 years.

More books came out after the movie. Scientific studies about dinosaurs got more attention and paleontologists published more papers. Universities began offering courses on dinosaurs. Many museums hired dinosaur experts for the first time.

For some dinosaur fans, attention to paleontology helped to turn childlike fun into a serious interest.

Andrew Farke discovered the appeal of dinosaurs when he was 4 years old. He was known in his hometown as "the dinosaur kid." So when "Jurassic Park" came out when he was 12 years old, the discussions that followed solidified his interest.

It was about then that he went from being a dinosaur fan to "really thinking that I wanted to be a paleontologist," says Farke. He now works in paleontology at the Raymond M. Alf Museum of Paleontology in Claremont, California.

A Golden Age For Dinosaur Discovery

"Jurassic Park" made not only dinosaurs cool, but also the scientists who study them. People wanted to be like them. 

The many scientists entering the field after "Jurassic Park" changed paleontology. They helped to bring new discoveries. 

From 1984 to 1994, about 15 new dinosaur species, or kinds, were named each year. That number has risen to about 50. Some have called this a golden age of discovery.

A Gateway To Science

Ali Nabavizadeh is a professor at Cooper Medical School of Rowan University in Camden, New Jersey. He says some paleontologists see a problem with the "Jurassic Park" craze. Not all of the dinosaurs are shown correctly in the films. 

Still, dinosaurs can get people into science. 

That's what happened for Nabavizadeh. He saw "Jurassic Park" when he was 6 years old. "The excitement I got in seeing the dinosaurs alive and in the flesh made me start to wonder, was this really what they looked like?" he says. 

Something similar happened for Thomas Adams. He was 25 years old and managing stores when the film came out. All of the interest caused him to change jobs.

Adams says he became a paleontologist because of "Jurassic Park." People don't believe it, he says. He now works in paleontology at the Witte Museum in San Antonio, Texas.

Adams had not liked school, but "Jurassic Park" sparked a new curiosity. His love for dinosaurs made learning fun.

"I rediscovered learning," he said.
