Africa's "Tree of Life," the baobab, may be victim of climate change

Baobab trees are found in the grasslands of Africa, Madagascar and Australia. They can live for thousands of years. Strange in appearance, they can grow to be quite large. Some of them have huge empty spaces inside. One baobab in South Africa was so large, it had space for people to meet.

That tree was a more than 1,000-year-old Sunland baobab. It was the biggest baobab in Africa. In 2017, it toppled over. Another famous African baobab, the Chapman tree in Botswana, fell over in 2016.

Scientists think that something is happening to the oldest and largest baobabs across the world.

Adrian Patrut is a scientist in Romania. That is a country in Eastern Europe. He studied the baobabs with a team of fellow scientists from across the world. They found that many of the oldest and largest baobab trees have died.

Tree Steeped In African History
The deaths of these trees is quite sad. The baobabs are not just a source of food for people. A great deal of history and culture is connected to these trees. Patrut said the tree has become a symbol of Africa.

Patrut has been working with scientists at universities in South Africa and the United States. They have been studying the trees since 2005.

Patrut's team thinks the largest baobabs are made of many tree stems. They weave together around an empty space. This is where the hollow comes from. The stems can also grow together. This is why, when moving from the inside to the outside of the tree, the wood can actually get older. For other trees like redwoods, the rings of wood on the outside are always younger.

"This is a unique characteristic of the African baobab and all the baobab trees," said Patrut. 

However, another expert on the trees disagrees with Patrut's ideas. 

New Wood Is Result Of Healing
David Baum is a plant scientist at the University of Wisconsin. He pointed out that the tree has an amazing ability to heal. Many of them are covered in scrapes from elephants. He thinks new wood forms inside the baobab when the tree is healing from an injury, creating the strange aging pattern.

Baum, however, agrees that large baobabs are dying, something he calls "heartbreaking."

"Each of these trees was unique and special," he wrote. "They have seen more history than we can imagine."

Patrut says the largest trees are in the most danger. He also believes that a changing climate is involved, although the scientists admit that they need more information. 

For some time, the overall temperature of the Earth has been heating up. This changes weather patterns in different parts of the earth, leading to more rain in some places and less in others.

Changing Climate Could Be Affecting Larger Trees More
Patrut pointed out that the largest trees need more water and food. They are affected more by changing temperatures and dry periods. Therefore, a change in weather patterns could hurt them more than smaller baobabs.

"Something obviously is going on in almost selectively affecting the largest and oldest," Thomas Lovejoy wrote in an email commenting on Patrut's study. Lovejoy studies the environment and is a rainforest expert at George Mason University in Virginia. He agrees that climate change is probably what is killing the large baobabs. However, the study does not have any proof that shows how the climate is changing where the trees live. 

In Zimbabwe, a country in the south of Africa, baobab deaths are reportedly happening alongside what appears to be some type of fungus. The fungus turns the trees black before they die.

Patrut's study surveys baobabs in many more locations. He argues that for the oldest trees in particular, the deaths did not come from a disease like the fungus. Instead, he thinks they came from a change in the trees' environment.