Africa is saddened by loss of some of its famous baobab trees

The baobab is one of the most famous trees of Africa. It has been called the "Tree of Life." The baobabs grow huge, hollow trunks. One baobab in South Africa was so large, it could fit people in it.

The South African tree was more than 1,000 years old. It was the biggest baobab in Africa. In 2017, it died. Another famous African baobab, the Chapman tree in Botswana, fell over in 2016.

Adrian Patrut is a scientist in Romania. It is a country in Eastern Europe. He put together a team of scientists from across the world. Together, they studied the largest and oldest baobabs. Many of these trees have died.

The loss of these trees is very sad. They do not just provide food. They are part of the history and culture of Africa. The baobab is a symbol of the continent. 

David Baum is a plant scientist at the University of Wisconsin. He disagrees with some of Patrut's ideas. Patrut thinks baobabs are made of many tree stems. Baum does not think this is how the trees grow.

Baum, however, agrees that large baobabs are dying. He called their deaths "heartbreaking."

Trees Have A Long History
"Each of these trees was unique and special," he wrote. "They have seen more history than we can imagine."

Patrut says the largest trees are in the most danger. He also believes that a changing climate is to blame. 

For some time, the Earth has been getting hotter. This changes weather patterns in different parts of the earth. Rain falls more in some places and less in others compared to before.

Weather Changes Hurting Bigger Trees
Patrut pointed out that the largest trees need more water and food. Hot or cold weather affects them more. They cannot go as long without rainfall. Changes in the weather could hurt them more than smaller trees.

Thomas Lovejoy studies the rainforest. He agrees that something is happening to the largest and oldest trees. Lovejoy also thinks that climate change is probably what is killing the trees. Patrut, though, needs more proof. The study does not show how the climate is changing where the baobabs live. 

Zimbabwe is a country in southern Africa. There, the baobabs are being attacked by a fungus. The fungus turns the trees black before they die.

Patrut does not think the trees died from a disease like the fungus. Instead, he thinks they died because of a change in the trees' environment.