"Heartbreaking" discovery: Africa's massive baobab trees are dying

The unusual baobab tree, sometimes called the "Tree of Life," is found in the savanna regions of Africa, Madagascar and Australia. Some baobabs live for thousands of years, forming wide trunks and high branches.  The trees can also develop massive hollows inside. One baobab in South Africa was so large, a group of people could meet there.

That tree was a more than 1,000-year-old Sunland baobab, apparently the biggest of these trees in Africa. In 2017,  it "toppled over." Another famous African baobab, the Chapman tree in Botswana, collapsed in 2016.

Something similar, a new scientific study suggests, is happening to the oldest and largest baobabs across the world. The scientists are calling it "an event of an unprecedented magnitude."

New research was done by Adrian Patrut of Babes-Bolyai University in the Eastern European country of Romania. He worked on the research with his team of international scientists. They found that many of the oldest and largest baobab trees have partially collapsed or died over the last 12 years. Nine of the 13 oldest and five of the six largest trees have died.

An African Icon
The loss of these trees, a key food source for people, is tragic. A great deal of history and culture is attached to the baobab. According to Patrut, the baobab is famous for being one of the largest plants around and has become a symbol of Africa.

Patrut's co-authors hail from institutions in South Africa and the United States, and the work was published in the journal Nature Plants. They have been surveying the trees since 2005 and have developed a theory of how they grow. They have also been documenting the deaths of trees.

Patrut's team believes that the largest baobabs weave together many tree stems around a small "false cavity" or gap. This is what gives them their unique structure. These stems also can grow together. This leads to a strange feature in which, moving outward from the cavity center, the wood can actually get older, rather than younger as might normally be expected. For trees like redwoods, the rings inside the trunk are the oldest. The rings on the outside are younger.

"This is a unique characteristic of the African baobab and all the baobab trees," said Patrut. He has studied different parts of the trees in order to accurately figure out their age.

However, another expert on baobabs was not fully convinced by this theory of how they grow.

Elephant Attacks Produce Healing Scars
"Pretty much every baobab tree in Southern Africa is covered in the healed scars of past elephant attacks, which speaks to the trees' amazing repair ability," said David Baum in an email. Baum is a University of Wisconsin botanist. He is familiar with Patrut's study and contributed to a recent Biodiversity International publication cataloging the trees' characteristics. He thinks the baobab's strange aging pattern is due to healing scars. "When a tree is damaged to form a hollow, bark can grow into the cavity and eventually start making new wood to fill in the hole. Such repair growth would lead to an inverted age sequence where wood initially gets older as you move towards the outside of the tree from the hollow."

Baum, however, agrees that large baobabs are dying, something he calls "heartbreaking."

"Each of these trees was unique and special," he wrote. "They have seen more history than we can imagine."

Patrut says the largest trees are in the most danger. He also believes that a changing climate is involved, although the study itself says that more research is necessary to argue for or against this claim. 

"The largest trees, they need more water and nutrients than the smaller trees, and they are most affected by temperature increase and drought," Patrut said.

"Something obviously is going on in almost selectively affecting the largest and oldest," Thomas Lovejoy wrote in an email comment on the study. Lovejoy is an environmental scientist and Amazon rainforest expert at George Mason University in Virginia.

"They do refer to other baobab mortality but don't have real data on it," Lovejoy continued. "I do think climate is a likely culprit, but they don't actually present any evidence of how climate is changing where these ancient trees occur."

Fungus Outbreak Precedes Death
In the southern African country of Zimbabwe, baobab deaths are reportedly being accompanied by what appears to be some type of fungus. The fungus turns the trees black before they die.

Patrut's study surveys baobabs much more widely. He argues that for the oldest trees in particular, the deaths "were not caused by an epidemic." Instead, he thinks they came from a change in the trees' environment.

The deaths are "an important modification in the ecosystem and the integrity of the biodiversity," Patrut said.