Animal lover sets out to save shelter dogs

When you go on vacation, do you take your pet with you? Lee Asher does — all six of them.

Asher has six rescue dogs. They are Lillie, Butters, Cali, Stella, Molly and Bo-Bo. Since February, he's been traveling across the country with them in a 30-foot RV. He's doing it to promote dog adoption. His friend Luke Barton is along for the ride. He's taking photos and videos.

21 States To Go
So far, they have been to 28 states and Washington, D.C. There are 21 states to go. Hawaii is not on the agenda. The island is too far to dog paddle to. The group hopes to finish in November or December. There are even plans for a repeat trip next year.

Asher has a goal to get one pet adopted for each state he visits. So far, he's done better. He averages three adoptions per state. In all, 83 dogs and one cat have found "forever homes."

Many Dogs Not Adopted

Every year, about 3.3 million dogs enter U.S. animal shelters. A similar number of cats enter shelters. Only about half get adopted. 

Asher is 29 and lives in Los Angeles. He and Barton, 31, quit their jobs to take this journey. They are using their savings to pay for it. They are also using the money they received from supporters. 

On long drives, the dogs sleep in the back. Stella or Bo-Bo sometimes sits in the passenger seat. The dogs get regular pit stops. So do the guys. The RV's bathroom is filled with dog food. It can't be used. At night, the RV is parked in a large lot. The dogs claim their spots on the bunk or the fold-out couch. "We're such a family," Asher says, laughing.

Bullied As A Kid

Asher says he was bullied as a kid. He had a hard time making friends.

"I loved animals. All I ever wanted to do was to be surrounded by animals," he says. He volunteered at his local animal shelter. Being around animals made him happy and helped him make friends.

Asher has advice for kids. "Learn to build compassion for all living things," he says.

The dogs have taught Asher to relax. "When we're in bad traffic or we have a problem with the RV, my dogs aren't worried about it, so why would I worry? ... A dog has a fresh start every day. The past is the past. I decided to live my life that way."