Traveling across the country to find "forever homes" for dogs

When you go on vacation, do you take your pet with you?

Lee Asher does — all six of them.

Asher has six rescue dogs. They are Lillie, Butters, Cali, Stella, Molly and Bo-Bo. Since February, he's been traveling across the country with them in a 30-foot RV. He's doing it to promote dog adoption. His friend Luke Barton is along for the ride, taking photos and videos.

So far, they have been to 28 states and Washington, D.C., with 21 to go. Hawaii is not on the agenda. It's a long way to dog paddle to the island. The group hopes to finish by the end of the year in November or December. There are even plans for a repeat trip next year.

Above And Beyond

Asher's goal was to get one pet adopted in each state they visited. As of mid-June, he has averaged three per state. That means 83 dogs and one cat have found "forever homes."

Every year, about 3.3 million dogs enter U.S. animal shelters. A similar number of cats enter shelters. Only about half get adopted. This is according to the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.

Each Dog Has Its Own Personality
Asher is 29 years old and lives in Los Angeles. He says each of his dogs has its own way of behaving. Stella, the most recent dog to join the family, moans a "wow" sound to get attention. Bo-Bo, a chocolate Lab, likes licking faces. Golden retriever Cali paws at you. Butters and Molly, the tiniest of the crew, want to cuddle in your lap. Lillie, a Saint Bernard who weighs 100 pounds, enjoys sitting on people.

Asher and Barton, 31, quit their jobs to take this journey. They are using their savings and money from supporters to pay for it. The hardest part, Asher says, is lack of space: "I'm hitting my head on something every day on this RV."

"We're Such A Family"
On long drives, the dogs sleep in the back. Occasionally, Stella or Bo-Bo will sit in the passenger seat. The dogs get regular pit stops and so do the guys. The RV's bathroom is filled with dog food and can't be used. At night, they park the RV in a large lot, and the dogs claim their spots on the bunk or the fold-out couch. "We're such a family," Asher says, laughing.

In April, the caravan visited the Washington, D.C., area. While parked near the White House, security officers walked up. Asher thought they would be told to move, but instead, the officers asked for pictures with the dogs. "It was so cool," he says.

Less cool was the accident they had in New Jersey. They drove under a low bridge and ripped part of the roof off the RV. It was raining and everyone got soaked. The wet-dog smell, Asher recalls, was "not fun."

Hard Time Making Friends

Asher says he was bullied as a kid. He had a hard time making friends.

"I loved animals. All I ever wanted to do was to be surrounded by animals," he says. He volunteered at his local animal shelter. Being around animals made him happy and helped him make friends.

"Learn to build compassion for all living things," he tells kids.

The dogs have taught Asher to relax. "When we're in bad traffic or we have a problem with the RV, my dogs aren't worried about it, so why would I worry? ... A dog has a fresh start every day; the past is the past. I decided to live my life that way."

With all the shelters he's visited this year, has he been tempted to add a seventh dog to his family? No, not yet, he says.