On the road to rescue dogs

Do you take your pets on vacation? Lee Asher does! He takes all six of them.

Mr. Asher has six dogs. They are all adopted. He got them from animal shelters. They are Lillie, Butters, Cali, Stella, Molly and Bo-Bo. Since February, Mr. Asher has been on a journey. He is traveling across the country with his pups! He is doing it to support dog adoption. His friend Luke Barton is along for the ride. Mr. Barton is taking photos and videos. They all live in a 30-foot RV. 

Too Far To Dog Paddle

So far, they have been to 28 states. They also made a stop in Washington, D.C. There are 21 states to go. Hawaii is not on their list. The island is too far to dog paddle. The group hopes to finish in November or December. They are planning a repeat trip next year, too!

Mr. Asher has a goal. It is to get one pet adopted for each state he visits. He is doing great so far. He averages three adoptions per state. In total, 84 animals have been adopted. One was a cat. The other 83 were dogs. They have all found "forever homes."

Only Half Get Adopted
Every year, millions of animals go to animal shelters. About 3 million are dogs. About the same number are cats. Only about half get adopted. 

Mr. Asher quit his job to take this trip. So did Mr. Barton. They are using their savings to pay for it. They also get money from supporters. 

On long drives, the dogs sleep in the back. Stella or Bo-Bo sometimes sits in the passenger seat. The dogs get regular pit stops. So do the guys. The RV's bathroom is filled with dog food. It cannot be used. At night, the RV is parked in a large lot. The dogs claim their spots. They sleep on the bunk or the fold-out couch. "We're such a family," Mr. Asher says, laughing.

Animal Lover

Mr. Asher says he was bullied as a kid. He had a hard time making friends.

"I loved animals. All I ever wanted to do was to be surrounded by animals," he says. He volunteered at his local animal shelter. Being around animals made him happy. It helped him make friends.

He has advice for kids. "Learn to build [love] for all living things," he says.