The scoop on poop: It helps gauge the number of mountain gorillas

In 2015 and 2016, troops of researchers spent weeks slogging through the thickly forested Virunga Mountains, a volcanic ridge in central Africa that slices across the countries of Rwanda, Uganda, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It was cold and humid, steep and slow-going. Some days, they'd only press on for a mile or so each day, machetes in hand, and return to camp exhausted. Their mission? They were on the hunt for treasure troves of gorilla poop.

For decades, one method of counting rare mountain gorillas has involved following their tracks and looking for glimpses of hair. Scientists also watched for splintered bamboo or squashed vegetation. Yet this has never been an easy way to conduct a census, or population count. Trails splinter, jump, and shift into unexpected directions, or dead-end if an animal scaled a tree.

Eyeball counts like that are still used for habituated populations — gorillas accustomed to the presence of humans. Researchers have given these creatures names and visit them every day. They know when they're sick, when one is born, when one dies. There are other gorillas that researchers know much less about, ones that live deeper in the forest. The prevailing wisdom, these days, is that people should give these gorillas space. "We don't want to meet them, and we don't want to disturb them," says Anne-Céline Granjon, a graduate student studying the gorillas at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany.

Mountain gorillas, one of the two subspecies of eastern gorilla, are highly endangered, and war and unrest have changed their world. By the mid-1980s, their numbers dwindled to around 250 individuals. Their ranks appear to have been stabilized by conservation efforts, but data about exactly how many there are, and where, are hard to come by.

Poop Aids Census
The International Gorilla Conservation Programme is a project led by two different groups, the World Wide Fund For Nature and Flora & Fauna International. The nature groups work with parks and local experts across all three nations. Recently, they set out to conduct a census without close contact with the gorillas. Their field teams followed tracks away from the gorillas and back to their nests. Like chimps, gorillas turn branches and leaves into little beds. When they wake in the morning, they relieve themselves, and their poop becomes a clue.

"We basically look for the poop," says Granjon, who trained local field teams and researched the genes of the animals. She said the teams "look for DNA fingerprints, the way you would at a crime scene." The idea was that by studying the poop, researchers could better count the individuals and learn their location.

Genes are sequences of DNA, which contains the instructions for how each part of the body works. Because DNA is passed from parent to child, it can tell scientists quite a bit about a species.

If gorillas are rare, their poop isn't, so researchers had more than enough material. "They leave too much poop, these gorillas; they poop all the time," says Granjon. Gorillas heed this call every few hours, and it's no small amount given that male mountain gorillas can weigh over 350 pounds. Fortunately, their leavings aren't particularly stinky, the researchers say. "They're herbivores, so it doesn't smell so much," Granjon says. "It smells when you're above it, but not from a distance."

The researchers walked more than 1,200 miles to cover 170 square miles of habitat. At the nests, they placed walnut-sized stool samples into vials, and labeled them with GPS coordinates for study at the Max Planck Institute laboratories. A given nest was only sampled once, unless it contained piles that looked really different, which could suggest a baby and its mother.

Fecal Matter Not Best DNA
No matter how swiftly and thoroughly dried the sample, though, fecal forensics isn't ideal. "Poop DNA is not the most perfect DNA one can find in the world," Granjon says. Samples from blood and other tissues yield more precise results. Because poop hangs around in the forest for a few days, exposed to sun, rain, and other animals, Granjon says, "it's already pretty fragmented to begin with." 

Even so, the 1,100 samples generated enough data, and Granjon was able to revise the estimate of the number of gorillas. By her count, announced last week, there are at least 186 unhabituated gorillas, in addition to the 418 habituated ones that researchers or tourists routinely see. Overall, this suggests a 26 percent increase from the last census in 2010. "This represents one of the rare success stories in conservation," said Martha Robbins, a research scientist and gorilla expert at the Max Planck Institute. "The population of mountain gorillas in the Virunga Volcanoes has more than doubled in the past three decades, despite intensive threats." Those threats include hunters, the decline of the environment and human warfare.

It's possible a degree of political steadiness helped stop the gorillas' decline since the end of the Second Congo War in 2003. However, fatal conflicts between rangers, militia, and smugglers are still common in the region. In response, Virunga National Park, home to many of the surviving mountain gorillas, will be closed to tourists until 2019, chief warden Emmanuel de Merode announced this month, explaining that right now it's not a safe place for primates — humans or gorillas.

The increased gorilla count could be due to better counting methodology as well as a real increase in the population. Chances are it's a bit of both, and the team of researchers has reason to believe there are even more gorillas that their count missed. "Probably," Granjon says, "there are a lot of gorillas we still haven't found."