Another way to count mountain gorillas: Studying their poop

The Virunga Mountains are a volcanic ridge in central Africa that slice through the countries of Rwanda, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 

In 2015 and 2016, researchers spent weeks slogging through the thickly forested area. The journey was cold and humid, steep and slow-going. Sometimes, the team would only hike for a mile or so each day, machetes in hand, and return to camp exhausted. What was their mission? They were looking for hidden treasures: gorilla poop.

For decades, one method of counting rare mountain gorillas has involved following their tracks and looking for glimpses of hair. Scientists also watch for splintered bamboo or squashed vegetation. Yet this has never been an easy way to count the population. Trails splinter and shift into unexpected directions. There can be a dead-end if an animal scaled a tree.

Eyeball counts are still used for habituated populations — gorillas accustomed to humans. Researchers visit them every day. They have given these gorillas names. The researchers know when they're sick, when one is born and when one dies. There are other gorillas that researchers know much less about, ones that live deeper in the forest. The prevailing wisdom, these days, is that people should give these gorillas space. "We don't want to meet them, and we don't want to disturb them," says Anne-Céline Granjon, a graduate student studying gorillas at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany.

Numbers Now Seem Stabilized
Mountain gorillas are one of the two or three subspecies of eastern gorilla. They are highly endangered because war and unrest have changed their world. By the mid-1980s, their numbers dwindled to around 250 individuals. Their ranks appear to have been stabilized by conservation efforts, but data about exactly how many there are, and where, are hard to come by.

The International Gorilla Conservation Programme is a project of the World Wide Fund For Nature and Flora & Fauna International. The nature groups, which  work with parks and local experts across all three nations, did a recent population count without contact with the gorillas. Researchers followed tracks away from the gorillas and back to their nests. Like chimps, gorillas turn branches and leaves into little beds. When they wake in the morning, they relieve themselves, and their poop becomes a clue.

"We basically look for the poop," says Granjon. 

Why look for poop? Poop contains DNA. Sequences of DNA, called genes, tell our bodies how to grow and operate. DNA contains the instructions for how each part of the body works. Because DNA is passed from parent to child, it can tell scientists how a species changes over time.

The researchers "look for DNA fingerprints, the way you would at a crime scene," Granjon said, explaining that the idea is to study the DNA in the gorilla poop in order to count them. 

Enough Samples
If gorillas are rare, their poop isn't, so researchers had more than enough material. "They leave too much poop, these gorillas; they poop all the time," says Granjon. Fortunately, their leavings aren't particularly stinky, she explains. "They're herbivores, so it doesn't smell so much," Granjon says. "It smells when you're above it, but not from a distance."

The researchers walked more than 1,200 miles. At the nests, they placed walnut-sized stool samples into vials for study at the Max Planck Institute laboratories. Each nest was only sampled once, unless it contained piles that looked really different, which suggests two gorillas there, perhaps a baby and mother.

No matter how swiftly and thoroughly dried the sample, though, fecal forensics isn't ideal. "Poop DNA is not the most perfect DNA one can find in the world," Granjon says. Samples from blood and other tissues yield more precise results. Because fecal matter hangs around in the forest for a few days, exposed to sun, rain, and other animals, Granjon says, "it's already pretty fragmented to begin with." 

Even so, the 1,100 samples generated enough data, and Granjon was able to update the estimate of the number of gorillas. By her count, announced this month, there are at least 186 unhabituated gorillas. These gorillas are in addition to the 418 habituated ones researchers and tourists routinely see. Overall, this suggests a 26 percent increase from the last count in 2010. 

Numbers Have Doubled Over 3 Decades
"This represents one of the rare success stories in conservation," said Martha Robbins, a research scientist and gorilla expert at the Max Planck Institute. "The population of mountain gorillas in the Virunga Volcanoes has more than doubled in the past three decades, despite intensive threats." Those threats include hunters, the decline of the environment and human warfare.

It's possible more peace among humans helped stop the gorillas' decline since the end of the Second Congo War in 2003. The country's government still does not function very well, and enforcing laws is difficult. Even though the war is officially over, the area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo where the gorillas live remains unstable. Fatal conflicts between rangers, militias, and smugglers are still common there. 

In response, Virunga National Park, home to many of the surviving mountain gorillas, will be closed to tourists until 2019. The chief warden, Emmanuel de Merode,  announced the closing this month, saying it's not a safe place for primates — humans or gorillas.

The increased gorilla count could be due to better counting methods as well as an increase in population. Chances are it's a bit of both. Researchers do believe their count missed some gorillas. "Probably," Granjon says, "there are a lot of gorillas we still haven't found."