Scientists go on poop hunt to get better count of mountain gorillas

A team of scientists was on a mission. They were looking for gorilla poop. 

In 2015 and 2016, scientists hiked through the forests of Africa. They climbed the Virunga Mountains. This volcanic ridge in Africa cuts across three countries. 

The journey across Rwanda, Uganda, and the Democratic Republic was steep. The scientists had to go slowly. They needed sharp swords to cut through thick forest. Sometimes, they only hiked a mile a day. They returned very tired. 

Using gorilla poop is a new way to count gorillas. 

Before this, scientists counted only the mountain gorillas they saw. They now know these gorillas well. Scientists visit them every day. They gave the gorillas names. The scientists know when they are sick. They know when one is born and when one dies. 

Searching For Other Mountain Gorillas
Other gorillas live in the mountains too. They live deep in the forests, and scientists know little about them.

Scientists do not want to bother them, says Anne-Céline Granjon. She studies gorillas. Granjon and other scientists now believe gorillas have a better chance to survive without people around.

Mountain gorillas are highly endangered. Wars changed their world. By the mid-1980s, their numbers shrank to around 250 gorillas. Scientists and others wanted these gorillas to survive. 

Many scientists have tried hard to protect gorillas. Counting the gorillas helps people make plans for protecting them. The scientists did a new count of the gorillas without seeing them.

"We basically look for the poop," says Granjon. They study it to learn about the genes. Genes are passed down from parents to children. They tell the body how to grow and work. The genes let scientists tell the gorillas apart. This is one way of counting them. 

The gorillas may be rare. Their poop is not. Scientists had more than enough to study. "They leave too much poop, these gorillas; they poop all the time," says Granjon. Gorillas go every few hours. 

186 More Found
Last week, Granjon said they counted 186 or more gorillas they had never seen. The scientists already knew about 418 gorillas. They see them regularly. 

Martha Robbins is a scientist at the Max Planck Institute. Robbins said there are two times as many mountain gorillas as thirty years ago.

Terrible wars took place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Second Congo War ended in 2003. It is possible that when people stopped fighting, gorillas stopped dying. The area can still be dangerous. Some fighting still continues. 

Scientists want to do another count. They think they missed some gorillas. Granjon says there are probably many gorillas they did not find. 

Perhaps they'll go on another poop hunt.