Scientists do more than eyeball gorillas: They also look for poop

In 2015 and 2016, scientists spent weeks hiking through the forested Virunga Mountains. This volcanic ridge in central Africa slices across the countries of Rwanda, Uganda, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The hike was cold, steep and slow-going. Sometimes, the scientists only hiked a mile each day, machetes in hand, and returned to camp tired. 

The researchers were on an important mission. They were searching for gorilla poop. 

For decades, one way of counting rare mountain gorillas has involved following their tracks and looking for hair. They watch for splintered bamboo or flattened plants. Yet this has never been an easy way to count the population. Trails split and shift in unexpected directions or dead-end if an animal scaled a tree.

Eyeball counts are still used for habituated populations — gorillas used to humans. Scientists visit them every day. They have given these gorillas names. They know when they're sick, when one is born, when one dies. There are other gorillas that scientists know much less about, ones that live deeper in the forest. However, ideas about studying gorillas have changed. Scientists now believe people should give these gorillas space. 

"We don't want to meet them, and we don't want to disturb them," says Anne-Céline Granjon. She studies gorillas at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Germany.

Numbers No Longer Decreasing
Mountain gorillas are one of the two types of eastern gorilla. They are highly endangered because war and unrest have changed their world. By the mid-1980s, their numbers dwindled to around 250 gorillas. The decrease appears to have been stopped. Scientists and many others have tried to make sure the mountain gorillas survive. Still, exactly how many there are has been hard to figure out.

Groups worked together to create a project called the International Gorilla Conservation Programme. The goal was to count the gorillas. The nature groups worked with parks and local experts across all three countries. The groups' scientists tried to do their count without close contact with gorillas. Scientists followed tracks away from the gorillas and back to their nests. Gorillas, like chimpanzees, turn branches and leaves into little beds. When they wake in the morning, they go to the bathroom, and their poop becomes a clue.

"We basically look for the poop," says Granjon.

Why look for poop? Poop contains DNA. Sequences of DNA, called genes, tell our bodies how to grow and operate. DNA contains the instructions for how each part of the body works. Because DNA is passed from parent to child, it can tell scientists how a species changes over time.

Distinguishing The Poops
The poop helps the scientists tell the gorillas apart from one another. They can then count the gorillas.

If gorillas are rare, their poop isn't, so scientists had more than enough material. "They leave too much poop, these gorillas; they poop all the time," says Granjon. Gorillas go every few hours. Fortunately, their poop isn't particularly stinky. "They're herbivores, so it doesn't smell so much," Granjon says. "It smells when you're above it but not from a distance." 

The scientists gathered 1,100 samples. Granjon used the samples to update the estimate of gorillas. By her count, announced earlier this month, there are at least 186 gorillas that scientists had not counted before. The scientists already knew about 418 gorillas they see regularly. 

Overall, this suggests an increase from the last count in 2010. "This represents one of the rare success stories," said Martha Robbins. She is a scientist at the Max Planck Institute. "The population of mountain gorillas in the Virunga Volcanoes has more than doubled in the past three decades."

Peace Has Improved Numbers
It's possible greater peace among humans helped stop the gorillas' decrease. A series of terrible wars took place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Second Congo War ended in 2003. However, deadly conflicts between rangers, soldiers, and smugglers still happen. 

Virunga National Park in the Congo announced last week it will close to tourists until 2019. It has become too dangerous. The park is home to many of the surviving mountain gorillas. The park's leader, Emmanuel de Merode, said it's not a safe place for humans or gorillas.

Scientists still want to do another count. They think they missed some gorillas. "Probably," Granjon says, "there are a lot of gorillas we still haven't found."