Team of high school students wins prize for app about Southeast Asia

UNESCO is a cultural group within the United Nations. It highlights specific cultures, customs and histories throughout the world. 

The UNESCO & Microsoft Hackathon for Culture and Peace is a contest for high schoolers. It asked them to make a web or mobile app. The programs they made had to talk about the shared history of countries in Southeast Asia.

A team called NASHIMETEKO won the contest. Their app, called "Sea Wander," explores cartoonish versions of famous Southeast Asia landmarks, like Thailand's golden temples. 

Cartoons And Educational Games

NASHIMETEKO spent one month building "Sea Wander" for the contest. They were announced as winners on May 21, 2018.

The mobile app has brightly-colored cartoon characters and educational games.  

Eighteen-year-old Yensira Chaisuk, nicknamed "Shin," is on team NASHIMETEKO. "I learned so many new things that I can take back and use in my work and even a new perspective for history," she said. 

The NASHIMETEKO team is named after the first syllables of each of the five members' names. It walked off with about $600 of prize money. They even got a trophy from Thailand's Royal Highness, Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn. 

Motivating Young Women

The five high school teammates live about 3.5 hours away from Bangkok, Thailand's capital city. They are about to enter college. All plan to continue studying science, engineering and the arts.

The tech company, Microsoft, wants to encourage young women to explore more jobs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, known as STEM. The Hackathon was organized as part of that effort. 

Today, only three of every 10 STEM graduates in Thailand are women. Each team in the hackathon had to have at least a mix of boys and girls. 

In the "Sea Wander" game, players can choose to be a farmer in Bali growing rice or a silk maker in Cambodia. The game uses folk tales to help educate users on the history of rice and silk. Players may start plowing fields or feeding silk worms in mini-games.

One of the judges, Montira Unakul, works at UNESCO Bangkok. "I think my son would want to play this game, and even many of the adults sitting in this room would want to play it, too," she said.

Another team developed an application that used story-based time travel. A different app was an educational journey about spice trade routes.

Designing Educational Applications

There were five finalist teams. Since the program launched on March 27, each team has had to propose and design a web or mobile educational application. Then, they would present it to the panel of judges. 

The app's theme matches with UNESCO's Shared Histories project, launched in 2015. Its goal is to ease tensions among Southeast Asian countries. It hopes to promote understanding between neighbors.

There are 11 countries in the region of Southeast Asia. Historians say that each country's schools often teach that nearby countries are opponents. History classes often celebrate just each individual country, not all of them as a whole.

These ideas influenced many people's thinking. The Shared Histories project hopes to provide new views of history. It wants to emphasize how the nations are similar and help them build respect for each other. 

The "Sea Wander" app has clear text and upbeat songs. The games go along smoothly. 

Technology And Knowledge To Succeed

Desarack Teso is an official at Microsoft, and one of the judges. Teso praised the program for its blend of technology and learning. It reflects Microsoft's belief that technology is meant to serve and improve human lives, he said. 

Microsoft wants to help people gain the skills and knowledge needed to succeed in the digital world. The hackathon is in line with these goals, it said. 

The company wants people to become "future-ready," free of technological obstacles and old-fashioned ideas. That future includes bringing more women into technology.
