By expressing your feelings, you won't let hunger be full of anger

The word "hangry" is fairly new. It combines the two words "hungry" and "angry." People started using it in the 2000s. 

The feeling of being hungry and angry at the same time is not new. It has been around as long as people have.

Jennifer MacCormack led a study about being hangry. MacCormack says past studies have shown what happens when someone is hungry. The body creates certain kinds of hormones. Hormones can change how you feel. These hormones make you feel angry. Your body wants food.

Controlling Hungry Feelings

MacCormack did her new study at the University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill. It showed people can help themselves feel less hangry. 

MacCormack found people to participate in two online tests. They were shown different types of pictures. One picture was happy while another picture was unhappy. 

Then people were shown a picture in Chinese. The Chinese picture was neither happy nor unhappy. 

If people were hungry and shown the unhappy picture first, they often said the Chinese picture was unhappy. Being hungry made people angrier. If people were not hungry, it did not matter what picture they saw before the Chinese picture. Their feelings did not change. 

There was a second test. MacCormack asked some students not to eat before the test. Another group of students did eat before the test.

Half the students were told to write about their feelings. The other half were told to write about a normal day. 

Less Anger When Expressing Feelings

All students took a computer test. They had to sort bright circles that were annoying to look at. Then the computer looked as if it had crashed. Someone working for MacCormack blamed the students for the computer crashing. The person told students they pressed a wrong button.

After the test, the students answered questions. The hungry students who wrote about a regular day before the test were more angry. The students who had written about their feelings responded differently. They were not as angry. This was true even if they were hungry. The study showed people can change being hangry. If people think about their feelings, they can be less hangry.

MacCormack says hungry people often blame being angry on other things. Their bodies are actually upset about being hungry, she says. People tend not to think about how they are really feeling.

MacCormack has another idea for stopping people from being "hangry." She says to eat healthy snacks.
