The less the stress then being hungry won't become hangry

You've probably heard someone say they're feeling "hangry." It was probably relatable. After all, we all get hungry. 

The word "hangry" combines "hungry" and "angry." The word has only been used regularly since the early 2000s. However, the experience of being hungry and angry at the same time is as old as the human stomach.

Researcher Jennifer MacCormack recently led a study about being "hangry" at the University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill. The results were published this month. 

She first did two online experiments on 400 people. Participants were shown three different types of images. One was designed to make them happy. Another was designed to make them unhappy. The last image was designed to make them neither happy or unhappy. 

Then the people were shown a Chinese image. They wouldn't be able to understand it (people who know Chinese were not included). The image was designed to make people neither happy nor unhappy. Participants then rated the Chinese image on a seven-point scale from pleasant to unpleasant. They were also asked how hungry they felt. 

Hunger Makes People More Unhappy

Hungry people shown the unhappy image first were more likely to say the Chinese image was unhappy. This shows hunger tends to worsen unhappy feelings. Meanwhile, hunger did not affect people shown the happy image before the Chinese image. It also did not affect the people shown the image that was neither happy nor unhappy.

There was a second experiment. MacCormack and her team instructed 118 college students not to eat for five or more hours before coming in for a lab study. Another group of 118 students was instructed to eat a meal before the experiment.

Half the students were asked to write about their emotions to direct attention to how they were feeling. The other half were told to write about a regular day. 

All of the students were instructed to complete a repetitive task on the computer. They had to sort bright circles that were annoying to look at. As the students neared the end of the task, the computer was programmed to look as if it had crashed. Then someone would enter the room and blame the students for the crash. The person would tell the students they pressed a wrong button.

After the experiment, the students answered questions about their emotions and the quality of the experiment. The hungry students who had written about the regular day tended to express more feelings of stress and anger. However, the students who wrote about their emotions before the task responded differently. They did not share the same shifts in emotions and outlook. This was true even if they had not eaten before the task. This showed "hanger" can be lessened. It just takes some self-reflection.

Hunger Causes Additional Stress

So why does hunger increase anger in the first place? The reason is not entirely clear. Still, MacCormack explains that previous studies have shown hunger activates many of the same biological systems as emotions. Hunger causes the body to release stress hormones, the body's natural chemicals. The hungrier you are, the more stress hormones are released. It makes you feel stressed and ready to act out in anger. When you're hungry — like when you're in the grip of a strong emotion — it can briefly change how you see the world.

The findings show feeling hangry happens when you are unhappy because of your hunger. However, we tend to blame our anger on the outside world. "You think that person who cut you off on the road is the one who made you angry," MacCormack writes about someone driving. People are upset about being hungry, she points out. They do not realize they're blaming something else for upsetting them, she says.

MacCormack has another idea for helping stop "hanger." She suggests protein-packed, healthy snacks. Snacking could solve some of the world's problems. Just this week an Ontario , California, woman described as hangry was scolded by police. She had called 911 to complain that a pizza shop was taking too long to make her pizza.
