With a little self-reflection, being hungry won't turn to hangry

The word "hangry," a combination of "hungry" and "angry," has only been in common use since the early 2000s, but the experience of being hungry and angry simultaneously is as old as the human stomach. Now,  researchers have taken a step toward figuring out why irritability and hunger go together like macaroni and cheese.

To study the phenomenon, Jennifer MacCormack and fellow researchers at the University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill first did two online experiments on 400 people. Their research appears in the scientific journal Emotion. 

Participants were shown images designed to cause positive, negative or neutral emotions before being shown a neutral Chinese image they wouldn't be able to read (people who know Chinese were not included). The people then rated the Chinese image on a seven-point scale from pleasant to unpleasant. They were also asked how hungry they felt. Hungry people shown the negative image first were more likely to rate the symbol as negative as well, showing that hunger tends to amplify negative feelings. Meanwhile, hunger did not seem to affect people shown neutral or positive images.

In a second experiment, the team enlisted 118 college students for a lab study, instructing them to fast for five or more hours before coming in. Another group of 118 students was instructed to eat a meal before the experiment.

Half the students were instructed to write a short essay about their emotions to direct their attention to how they were feeling. The other half were told to write about an unemotional regular day. 

A Crash Course

Then, all students were instructed to complete an intentionally tedious task on the computer, sorting bright circles that were annoying to look at. As the students neared the end of the task, the computer was programmed to pop up "the blue screen of death," making it look as if the computer had crashed. A researcher would enter the room and blame the students for the crash, telling them they pressed a wrong button.

After the experiment, the students were asked to fill out a questionnaire about their emotions and the quality of the experiment. The hungry students who had written about the regular day tended to lash out more, expressing more feelings of stress and anger. They rated the researchers as harsher or more judgmental while the students who wrote about their emotions before the task didn't share these same shifts in emotions and social perception. This was true even for hungry students. In other words, with a little self-reflection, the "hangry" feeling can be defused. 

"A well-known commercial once said, 'You're not you when you're hungry,' but our data hint that by simply taking a step back from the present situation and recognizing how you're feeling, you can still be you even when hungry," MacCormack says.

So why does hunger ramp up anger in the first place? The reason is not clear, but MacCormack explains that previous studies have shown hunger activates many of the same biological systems as emotions. Hunger causes the body to release the stress hormones cortisol and adrenaline. The hungrier you are, the more hormones are released, causing stress and priming us for action — like lashing out in anger. When you're hungry — like when you're in the grip of a strong emotion — it can temporarily change how you see the world.

Blaming Others

"These findings suggest that feeling hangry occurs when your hunger-induced negativity gets blamed on the external world around you. You think that person who cut you off on the road is the one who made you angry," MacCormack writes. People are upset about being hungry but don't realize they're blaming something else for upsetting them, she says.

Elizabeth Davis, a psychologist at the University of California, Riverside, not involved with the study, says the experiments show that being hangry depends on the situation. If we're hungry and having a bad day and a student blames us for their crappy computer freaking out, we're likely to direct our anger at them. If we're hungry because we just ran through a field of daisies with a pack of adorable puppies, we might not be so snappy. "(Hunger) signals to us that something is wrong — that it's time to eat," Davis says. "But as humans, we may misattribute that aversive feeling to something external before we look into what our body is telling us."

MacCormack suggests eating protein-packed, healthy snacks can keep "hanger" at bay. Snacking, it seems, could lessen some of the world's problems. Just this week an Ontario, California, woman described as hangry was scolded by police for calling 911 to complain that a pizza place was taking too long to bake her pie. If she hadn't been so hungry, she might not have made the call.
