Hungry can turn to hangry if you can't overcome negative feelings

During the Olympics, snowboarder Chloe Kim tweeted she was feeling "hangry." Twitter fans loved it, probably because the feeling was relatable. 

The word "hangry," a combination of "hungry" and "angry," has only been used regularly since the early 2000s. However, the experience of being hungry and angry at the same time is as old as the human stomach. Now,  researchers have taken a step toward figuring out why irritability and hunger go together like macaroni and cheese.

To study the phenomenon, Jennifer MacCormack and fellow researchers at the University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill first did two online experiments on 400 people. Their research appears in the science journal Emotion. 

Participants were shown images designed to cause happy, unhappy or neutral emotions. Then they were shown a neutral Chinese image they wouldn't be able to understand (people who know Chinese were not included). The people then rated the Chinese image on a seven-point scale from pleasant to unpleasant. They were also asked how hungry they felt. Hungry people shown the unhappy image first were more likely to rate the Chinese image as unhappy as well. The result shows hunger tends to worsen unhappy feelings. Meanwhile, hunger did not seem to affect people shown neutral or positive images before the Chinese image.

In a second experiment, the team enlisted 118 college students for a lab study, instructing them not to eat for five or more hours before coming in. Another group of 118 students was instructed to eat a meal before the experiment.

This Blue Screen Was Intentional

Half the students were instructed to write a short essay about their emotions to direct their attention to how they were feeling. The other half were told to write about an unemotional regular day. Then those students were instructed to complete an intentionally repetitive task on the computer. They had to sort bright circles that were annoying to look at. As the students neared the end of the task, the computer was programmed to pop up "the blue screen of death," making it look like the computer had crashed. Then a researcher would enter the scene and blame them for the crash, telling them they pressed a wrong button.

After the experiment, the students were asked to answer questions about their emotions and the quality of the experiment. The hungry students who had written about the regular day tended to lash out more, expressing more feelings of stress and anger. They rated the researchers as harsher or more judgmental. However, the students who wrote about their emotions, focusing on their feelings before the task, did not share these same shifts in emotions and social perception. This was true even for students who had not eaten before the task. In other words, with a little self-reflection, "hanger" can be lessened. 

"A well-known commercial once said, 'You're not you when you're hungry,'" MacCormack says, before saying her study suggests otherwise. "Simply taking a step back from the present situation and recognizing how you're feeling, you can still be you even when hungry." 

So why does hunger ramp up anger in the first place? The reason is not clear, but MacCormack explains that previous studies have shown hunger activates many of the same biological systems as emotions. Hunger causes the body to release stress hormones, or chemicals in our body. The hungrier you are, the more stress hormones are released. It makes us feel stressed and ready for action — like lashing out in anger. When you're hungry —like when you're in the grip of a strong emotion — it can temporarily change how you see the world.

"These findings suggest that feeling hangry occurs when your hunger-induced negativity gets blamed on the outside world. You think that person who cut you off on the road is the one who made you angry," MacCormack writes about someone driving. People are upset about being hungry but don't realize they're blaming something else for upsetting them, she says.

What Kind Of Day Are You Having?

Elizabeth Davis is a psychologist at the University of California, Riverside. Davis was not involved with the study. She says the experiments show being hangry depends on the situation. 

We could be hungry and having a bad day. To make it worse, someone blames us for their crappy computer freaking out. We're likely to direct our anger at them. On the other hand, if we're hungry because we just ran through a huge field of daisies with a pack of adorable puppies, we might not be so angry. 

"(Hunger) signals to us that something is wrong — that it's time to eat," Davis says. "But as humans, we may misattribute that." We think the unhappy feeling is something outside ourselves before we think about what our body is telling us.

MacCormack suggests eating protein-packed, healthy snacks can keep "hanger" at bay. Snacking could solve some of the world's problems. Just this week an Ontario, California, woman described as hangry was scolded by police. She had called 911 to complain that a pizza place was taking too long to bake her pie. If she hadn't been so hungry, she might not have felt the need to complain.
