Opinion: World Cup — U.S. out, new teams in

The men's World Cup soccer tournament began on Thursday. The World Cup takes place every four years. It is one of the world's biggest sporting events.

Russia is hosting the tournament this year. And the U.S. team will not be playing. It didn't win enough games to make it into the tournament.

That does not mean Americans shouldn't watch and enjoy the World Cup. They cannot cheer for the home team — so they will just have to find another team to support! How do you pick one? Here are some suggestions.

Family History

The United States is a country of immigrants. Almost every family has relatives who used to live in another country. Some of these relatives came to the U.S. long ago. Others may have arrived more recently.  

The World Cup is a good time to learn about your family history. Thirty-two countries compete in the tournament. Ask your parents or grandparents: What country or countries did your ancestors come from? How long ago did they move to America?

The answers may give you some great stories. They also may help you find a new favorite team. You can root for a country where your relatives once lived.

Small But Good

Iceland is a tiny nation near Greenland. It has less than 350,000 people. It is the smallest country to play in the World Cup.

This will give you an idea of how small Iceland is: There are about 327 million people in the United States. That is almost 1,000 times more people than Iceland. Even Washington, D.C. has more people than Iceland. Our nation's capital has about twice as many people.

Iceland may be small, but the men's team is good. It's ranked 22nd in the world.

One Problem

I have one problem with soccer. Players don't score enough goals. Many times, neither team makes a goal. The final score of a game can be 0-0.

Goals are not a problem for Germany, though. This country won the last World Cup. They were the highest-scoring team in the past three tournaments. If you like seeing players score goals, Germany may be the team for you.

Top Players

Soccer is the most popular game in Europe. They call it football there. The big teams in Europe have many fans. They also have most of the world's top players.

In the World Cup, players play for their countries, not their local teams. One way to pick a World Cup team is to cheer for your favorite player's team. Some of the world's top players are competing in the World Cup this year. Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo are two examples. Messi is from Argentina. Ronaldo is from Portugal. Other favorites include Neymar of Brazil and Mohamed Salah from Egypt.

Who is my favorite player? Fred! He is on the Brazil team. Many Brazil players go by just one name. Brazil's team is ranked Number 2 in the world. This team plays a beautiful game.

I think I found my new favorite team. Viva Brazil!
