Opinion: U.S. soccer fans must find new favorite team

The World Cup is a soccer tournament. It is one of the world's largest sporting events. Billions of people watch it! The competition takes place every four years. 

The men's 2018 World Cup began on Thursday. This year, Russia is the host country. The U.S. team will not be playing. It did not win enough games to get in.

The United States cannot cheer for the home team. That does not mean Americans cannot enjoy the games, though. They just have to find another team to support! 

How can you pick a new favorite? Here are some suggestions.

Parents And Grandparents

The United States is a country of immigrants. Almost every family came from somewhere else. Some of these relatives came to the U.S. long ago. Others arrived more recently.  

The World Cup is a good time to learn about your family history. Talk to your parents or grandparents. Ask them: Where did your ancestors come from? How long ago did they move to America?

You might hear some great stories. You may also find a new favorite team. Root for a country where your relatives once lived.

Tiny Island

Iceland is a tiny island nation. It is near Greenland. Iceland is the smallest country in the World Cup. It has less than 350,000 people. 

Compare that with the United States. The U.S. has a population of 327 million. That is almost 1,000 times more people than Iceland! 

Iceland may be small. The men's team is very good, though. It is ranked 22nd in the world. 

Scoring Goals

I have one problem with soccer: Players do not score enough goals. Many times, neither team makes a goal. Then the final score is 0-0.

Goals are not a problem for Germany, though. The German team won the last World Cup. They were the highest-scoring team in the past three tournaments. Do you like seeing players score goals? Then Germany may be the team for you.

Most Popular

Soccer is the most popular game in Europe. They call it football there. The big teams in Europe have many fans. They also have many of the world's top players.

In the World Cup, players do not play for local teams. They play for their countries. The countries compete against each other. One way to pick a World Cup team is to find a favorite player. Then cheer for that player's team.

Who is my favorite? Fred! He is a player on the Brazil team. Many Brazil players go by just one name. Brazil's team is ranked Number 2 in the world. They play beautifully.

I think I found a new favorite team. Viva Brazil!
