Antarctica's ice is melting and scientists agree the loss is critical

WASHINGTON, D.C. — The melting of Antarctica's ice is speeding up at an alarming rate. About 3 trillion tons of ice have disappeared since 1992, an international team of ice experts said in a new study.

In the last 25 years, the southern-most continent's ice sheet melted into enough water to cover the state of Texas, scientists calculated. Not only could the water cover Texas, it could do so at a depth of nearly 13 feet (4 meters). The ice melt on Antarctica is a key indicator of climate change, or rising temperatures on Earth. All that water from Antarctica's melted ice made global oceans rise about three-tenths of an inch (7.6 millimeters).

From 1992 to 2011, Antarctica lost nearly 84 billion tons of ice a year (76 billion metric tons). From 2012 to 2017, the melt rate increased almost three times. During those five years, it increased to 241 billion tons a year (219 billion metric tons). This information comes from the new study published June 13, in the scientific journal Nature.

Ice Is Melting Faster Than Expected

"I think we should be worried. That doesn't mean we should be desperate," said University of California, Irvine's Isabella Velicogna, one of 88 co-authors of the study. "Things are happening. They are happening faster than we expected."

Part of West Antarctica, where most of the melting occurred, "is in a state of collapse," said co-author Ian Joughin of the University of Washington.

The study is the second of the measurements planned every several years by a team of scientists working with NASA, the U.S. space agency, and the European Space Agency. Their mission is to produce the broadest overview of what's happening to the world's at-risk ice sheets in Antarctica and Greenland.

Outside experts praised the work as authoritative.

Ice Loss Is Studied From All Angles

Many single-measurement studies have been done. This team of scientists, however, looks at ice loss in 24 different ways using images from 10 to 15 satellites, said lead author Andrew Shepherd of the University of Leeds in England. He said the team also uses ground and air measurements and computer simulations.

It's possible Antarctica alone can add about half a foot (16 centimeters) to sea level rise by the end of this century, Shepherd said. Other factors also cause seas to rise. These causes include melting land glaciers, Greenland's dwindling ice sheet and the fact that warmer water expands.

"Under natural conditions we don't expect the ice sheet to lose ice at all," Shepherd said about Antarctica. "There are no other plausible signals to be driving this other than climate change.

Natural Earth Changes Versus Climate Change

Shepherd does blame the Earth's rising temperatures for melting ice. However, he said this is not a study saying humans are to blame for climate change.

Forces "that are driving these changes are not going to get any better in a warming climate," said University of Colorado ice scientist Waleed Abdalati. He is a former NASA scientist who was not part of the study team.

In Antarctica, it's mostly warmer water causing the melt. The water nibbles at the floating edges of ice sheets from below. Warming of the southern ocean is connected to shifting winds, which are connected to global warming from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas, Shepherd said.

More than 70 percent of the recent melt is in West Antarctica.

The latest figures show East Antarctica is losing relatively little ice each year — about 31 tons (28 metric tons) — since 2012. It was gaining ice before 2012.

So far scientists are not comfortable saying the trend in East Antarctica will continue. It is caused by natural changes in the Earth rather than climate change, said study co-author Joughin. He thinks East Antarctica could stay stable for a few decades.

"The Situation Is Dire"

Another study in the journal Nature found the East Antarctic ice sheet also did not melt significantly 2 million to 5 million years ago. At that time, carbon dioxide levels were similar to what they are now. Carbon dioxide traps heat into the Earth's atmosphere. This causes temperatures to rise and ice to melt. 

Twila Moon is a research scientist at the National Snow and Ice Data Center. Though she was not part of the studies, she still considers the loss of ice to be dreadful. 

"Ice-speaking, the situation is dire," Moon said.
