Opinion: U.S. soccer fans have a chance to pick new World Cup favorites

The men's World Cup soccer tournament began on Thursday in Russia. The U.S. team will not be playing. For the first time since 1986, it failed to qualify. That means it didn't win enough games to make it into the World Cup. However, just because the United States isn't playing doesn't mean you have to sit out one of the world's biggest sporting events.

You will just have to find another team to cheer for. How do you do that? Here are some suggestions.

Country Of Immigrants

The United States is a country of immigrants. Almost every family in the U.S. has relatives who lived in another country before moving to America.

This World Cup may be a good time to ask your parents or grandparents about your family history. Ask where your ancestors came from, and how long ago it was that they moved to America.

The answers may give you some fascinating family stories you never heard before. And they may help you find a new favorite team.

Smallest Country To Play In World Cup

Iceland is a tiny nation near Greenland. It has a population of less than 350,000 people and is the smallest country ever to play in the World Cup.

To give you some idea how small Iceland is, the United States has a population of about 327 million. That is almost 1,000 times more people than Iceland. Even Washington, D.C. has a bigger population than Iceland, with about twice as many people.

Iceland may be small, but the men's team is good. It's ranked 22nd in the world. So if you like to root for the "little guys" against the "big guys," root for Iceland.

Highest-Scoring Team

My problem with soccer is that there aren't enough goals. Sometimes players don't score any and games end up 0-0.

Scoring goals is not a problem for Germany, the country that won the last World Cup. The Germans have been the highest-scoring team in the past three World Cup tournaments. They also scored 43 goals in the 10 games in their World Cup qualifying tournament. The qualifying tournaments are a series of games that decide which teams make it into the World Cup.

Pick A New Favorite Team

Lots of kids watch matches on television from the major leagues in Europe, like the Premier League in Britain and La Liga in Spain. These leagues have most of the world's top players.

In the World Cup, players represent their countries instead of their soccer clubs. But you can still root for your favorite players, such as Lionel Messi from Argentina or Cristiano Ronaldo from Portugal. Other top players are Neymar of Brazil and Mohamed Salah from Egypt.

My favorite player, though, is Fred. He is on the Brazil national team. Many Brazil players go by just one name. Brazil's team is ranked Number 2 in the world and plays a beautiful game.

I think I may have found a new favorite team. Viva Brazil!
