A new study says Antarctica's ice sheet is melting alarmingly fast

WASHINGTON, D.C. — The melting of Antarctica is accelerating at an alarming rate, with about 3 trillion tons of ice disappearing since 1992, an international team of ice experts said in a new study.

In the last quarter century, the southern-most continent's ice sheet — a key indicator of climate change — melted into enough water to cover Texas to a depth of nearly 13 feet (4 meters), scientists calculated. All that water made the oceans rise about three-tenths of an inch (7.6 millimeters).

From 1992 to 2011, Antarctica lost nearly 84 billion tons of ice a year (76 billion metric tons). From 2012 to 2017, the melt rate increased almost three times to 241 billion tons a year (219 billion metric tons), according to the study published June 13, in the journal Nature.

"I think we should be worried. That doesn't mean we should be desperate," said University of California, Irvine's Isabella Velicogna, one of 88 co-authors. "Things are happening. They are happening faster than we expected."

Praise For The Thorough, In-Depth Study

Part of West Antarctica, where most of the melting occurred, "is in a state of collapse," said co-author Ian Joughin of the University of Washington.

The study is the second in a series of assessments planned every several years by a team of scientists working with NASA and the European Space Agency. Their mission is to produce a broad overview of what's happening to the world's at-risk ice sheets in Antarctica and Greenland.

Outside experts praised the work as authoritative.

Other studies use single measurements. This team of scientists looks at ice loss in 24 different ways using 10 to 15 satellites, said lead author Andrew Shepherd of the University of Leeds in England. He said the team also uses ground and air measurements and computer simulations.

It's possible Antarctica alone can add about half a foot (16 centimeters) to sea level rise by the end of the century, Shepherd said. Other factors also cause seas to rise. These include melting land glaciers, Greenland's dwindling ice sheet and the fact that warmer water expands.

"Under natural conditions we don't expect the ice sheet to lose ice at all," Shepherd said. "There are no other plausible signals to be driving this other than climate change."

It's "Not Going To Get Any Better"

Although Shepherd attributes the melting ice to the Earth's rising temperatures, he cautioned that this is not a formal study to show human fingerprints on climate events.

Forces "that are driving these changes are not going to get any better in a warming climate," said University of Colorado ice scientist Waleed Abdalati. He is a former NASA chief scientist who was not part of the study team.

In Antarctica, it's mostly warmer water causing the melt. The water nibbles at the floating edges of ice sheets from below. Warming of the southern ocean is connected to shifting winds, which are connected to global warming from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas, Shepherd said.

More than 70 percent of the recent melt is in West Antarctica.

The latest figures show East Antarctica is losing relatively little ice a year — about 31 tons (28 metric tons) — since 2012. It was gaining ice before 2012.

East Antarctica Should Remain Stable

So far, scientists are not comfortable saying the trend in East Antarctica will continue. It is likely natural variability rather than climate change, and East Antarctica is probably going to be stable for a couple decades, study co-author Joughin said.

Another recent study published in the scientific journal Nature found the East Antarctic ice sheet did not melt significantly 2 million to 5 million years ago either. At that time, carbon dioxide levels were similar to what they are now. Carbon dioxide traps heat into the Earth's atmosphere. This causes temperatures to rise and ice to melt. 

Twila Moon is a research scientist at the National Snow and Ice Data Center who was not part of the studies. She considers the loss of ice dreadful. 

"Ice-speaking, the situation is dire," she said.
