Antarctica's faster-than-expected ice melt is troubling scientists

WASHINGTON, D.C. — Antarctica is melting so fast it is causing alarm. About 3 trillion tons of ice has melted since 1992, a team of ice experts said in a new study.

It was already known that the ice sheet on the world's southern-most continent was melting. What scientists discovered is how much Antarctica has melted in the last 25 years. 

The ice has melted enough water to cover Texas and be 13 feet (4 meters) deep, scientists said. Texas is America's second-biggest state. 

The ice melt on Antarctica is a key effect of climate change, which is causing rising temperatures on Earth. All the water from Antarctica's melted ice made the world's oceans rise. The oceans rose about three-tenths of an inch (7.6 millimeters).

Things Are Happening Faster Than Expected

From 1992 to 2011, Antarctica lost nearly 84 billion tons of ice a year (76 billion metric tons). A ton weighs 2,000 pounds (907.2 kilograms), whereas a metric ton is equal to 1,000 kilograms, or 2,205 pounds. From 2012 to 2017, the melt increased to 241 billion tons a year (219 billion metric tons). That means the ice is melting almost three times as fast. This information comes from the study published June 13 in the journal Nature.

"I think we should be worried. That doesn't mean we should be desperate," said University of California, Irvine's Isabella Velicogna. She is one of 88 co-authors of the study. "Things are happening. They are happening faster than we expected."

Most of the melting has happened to West Antarctica. Part of this side of the continent is breaking apart, said co-author Ian Joughin of the University of Washington.

This Study Has Been Very Detailed

The study is the second of regularly planned measurements. Every several years a team of scientists will measure the ice melt. The scientists work with NASA, the U.S. government agency responsible for space study and travel. They also work with the European Space Agency. Their mission is to produce an overview of what is happening to the at-risk ice sheets in Antarctica and Greenland.

Outside experts praised the scientists' work.

Many single-measurement studies have been done. This team of scientists, however, looks at ice loss in 24 different ways. The study's lead writer, Andrew Shepherd of the University of Leeds in England, explained the different measurements. He said they use 10 to 15 satellites, which take pictures of Earth from the sky. The team also uses ground and air measurements. Finally, they use computer models.

Antarctica's Melt Affects the Whole Planet

It is possible Antarctica alone can add about 6 inches (16 centimeters) to sea level rise by 2099, Shepherd said. Seas also rise for other reasons. These reasons include melting land glaciers, the country of Greenland's dwindling ice sheet and the fact that warmer water expands.

"Under natural conditions we don't expect the ice sheet to lose ice at all," Shepherd said. 

Shepherd blames the Earth's rising temperatures for melting Antarctica's ice. However, he said this study is not about saying people are at fault for climate change.

In Antarctica, it is mostly warmer water causing the melt. The water nibbles at the floating edges of ice sheets from below. Warming of the southern ocean is connected to shifting winds. The winds are connected to the Earth's warming from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas, Shepherd said. People burn these natural elements to heat homes and run their cars, among other things.

Ice Loss Is Troubling

More than 70 percent of the recent melt is in West Antarctica.

The latest figures show East Antarctica is losing relatively little ice a year. It has lost about 31 tons (28 metric tons) since 2012. It had been gaining ice before 2012.

Twila Moon is a scientist at the National Snow and Ice Data Center. She was not part of the studies. Moon considers the loss of ice to be troubling and said, "Ice-speaking, the situation is dire."
