The ice of Antarctica is melting faster, and that worries scientists

WASHINGTON, D.C. — The continent of Antarctica is melting fast. Antarctica is covered in ice. So much ice has melted in recent years that scientists are very concerned. 

Since 1992, the ice has melted into enough water to cover the state of Texas. The water covering Texas would be 13 feet deep. That is much deeper than most swimming pools. 

Antarctica is the world's southern-most continent. People have known Antarctica's ice has been melting. A new study by scientists gives more details. The study shows how much Antarctica has melted in the last 25 years.  

Scientists also learned how fast Antarctica's ice has been melting. It has been melting much faster since 2012. The ice has melted three times as fast.

"I Think We Should Be Worried"

The scientists see Antarctica's melting ice as proof of climate change. The Earth is getting warmer. Its climate is changing.

One worry is that melting ice causes oceans to rise. This could cause problems. The melting of Antarctica's ice has made oceans rise. The oceans have risen almost a half of an inch (7.6 millimeters) since 1992.

"I think we should be worried," said Isabella Velicogna. She is a scientist from the University of California, Irvine. She helped to write the study. 

Velicogna said we are not in danger right now. Still, she said ice is melting faster than expected.

Antarctica's Ice Will Be Tested Regularly

Antarctica is divided into West Antarctica on one side and East Antarctica on the other. 

West Antarctica is melting more quickly. Some of that side is breaking apart, said Ian Joughin. He is a scientist at the University of Washington. He also helped to write the study. East Antarctica has not melted as much. 

Scientists will test how much Antarctica melts every few years. This is the second test so far.

Andrew Shepherd is a scientist from England. He was in charge of the study. He said the oceans could rise much more by 2099. Antarctica's ice could add about 6 inches (16 centimeters) of water by itself. 

Warm Ocean Breezes Are Affecting The Ice

Oceans rise for other reasons too. The country of Greenland also has an ice sheet. That ice is melting as well. Also, as water gets warmer it takes up more space.

The water has warmed around Antarctica. This is causing the ice to melt. The warmer ocean is caused by changing winds. The winds change with the planet's warming, Shepherd said. 

He gave one reason why the Earth is getting warmer. It is because of how people use coal, oil and gas. People burn these elements. They use the energy to heat homes and run cars.

That has many people concerned for the future of the planet.
