Opinion: With U.S. out of World Cup, Americans can pick a new favorite team

The men's World Cup soccer tournament is one of the world's biggest sporting events. The 2018 World Cup began on Thursday in Russia. This year, the U.S. team will not be playing. For the first time since 1986, it didn't win enough games to make it into the World Cup. 

That doesn't mean U.S. fans shouldn't watch, though. You just have to find another team to cheer. How do you do that? Here are some suggestions.

Relatives In Other Countries

The United States is a country of immigrants. Almost every family has relatives who used to live in another country.

This World Cup may be a good time to ask your parents or grandparents about your family history. Where did your ancestors come from? How long ago did they move to America?

The answers may give you some great family stories you never heard before. They also may help you find a new favorite team.

"Little Guys" Against "Big Guys"

Iceland is a tiny nation near Greenland. It has a population of less than 350,000 people. It is the smallest country ever to play in the World Cup.

To give you some idea how small Iceland is, we can compare it to the United States. There are about 327 million people in the U.S. That is almost 1,000 times the number of people in Iceland. Even our nation's capital, Washington, D.C., has a bigger population than Iceland. It has about twice as many people.

Iceland may be small, but the men's team is good. It's ranked 22nd in the world. So if you like to root for the "little guys" against the "big guys," root for Iceland.

Final Score: 0-0

My problem with soccer is that there is not enough goals. In some games, neither team makes a goal. The final score ends up 0-0.

Scoring goals is not a problem for Germany. This country won the last World Cup. The Germans have been the highest-scoring team in the past three World Cup tournaments. They also scored 43 goals in the 10 games in the World Cup qualifying tournament. The qualifying tournaments are a series of games. They decide which teams make it into the World Cup.

Smaller Local Teams

Many kids watch soccer matches on television from the major leagues in Europe. These leagues include the Premier League in Britain and La Liga in Spain. They are made up of smaller local teams, or clubs. Most of the world's top players play for these leagues. 

In the World Cup, players do not play for their local soccer club. Instead, they represent their countries. One way to pick a World Cup team is to root for your favorite players. Some of the world's top players are competing in the World Cup this year. They include Lionel Messi from Argentina, Cristiano Ronaldo from Portugal, Neymar of Brazil and Mohamed Salah from Egypt.

Who is my favorite player? Fred! He plays on the Brazil national team. Many Brazil players go by just one name. Brazil's team is ranked Number 2 in the world. The team plays a beautiful game.

I think I may have found a new favorite team. Viva Brazil!
