A Missouri school stresses the importance of racial equity for students

Lead "guide" Anne Lacey sits on the rug at City Garden Montessori School in St. Louis, Missouri. She teaches her first- to third-grade students. She's white, with wavy hair and glasses. 

Robert Nelson, the assistant guide (a Montessori term for teachers), checks a boy's math. He's African-American, with a shaved head and black beard.

The school's educators reflect the mix of races in the nearby neighborhoods that get preference in who is chosen as students.

Mission To Include All Races

Everyday moments show the school's mission for the inclusion of all races — like students using popsicle sticks to make mini "Black Lives Matter" signs.

The school is less than 20 miles from Ferguson, Missouri. In 2014, the police killing of African-American teenager Michael Brown there sparked the "Black Lives Matter" movement. It is a movement to stop violence and racism against the black community.

City Garden's mission focuses not only on the inclusion of students of all races and economic levels, but also "anti-bias, anti-racist" education, or ABAR, for its staff.

"We no longer have the privilege of pretending that race doesn't matter," says Nicole Evans, the school's African-American principal.

Montessori is a child-centered approach to school. The United States has an estimated 4,000 Montessori schools, 500 of them public. Among those 500, about 55 percent are charter schools, according to Mira Debs, executive director of the Education Studies Program at Yale University.

Charter schools are different from traditional public schools. While both are funded by taxpayers, charter schools are independently operated and public schools are operated by a public school board. 

Numbers show school integration hasn't been a focus for most charter schools. However, City Garden is one of 125 U.S. charter schools identified as "diverse by design," or racially balanced, in a report published May 15.

Interest in anti-racism work in Montessori schools is growing. Hundreds attend a conference for Montessori for Social Justice, a group City Garden leaders helped create.

Bringing Race To The Surface "Gets Messy"

In 2008, black and white parents helped create the City Garden charter school. It offered an integrated public Montessori through eighth grade. The city schools had large concentrations of students of color, while private schools were mostly white.

Last December, City Garden became the first charter in Missouri to be approved for another 10 years.

When Evans arrived as principal, the staff had recently begun anti-bias training, but she says it still needs to make sure black students are as successful as white students.

This has involved about 20 hours of anti-bias, or ABAR, training each summer, and regular professional development sessions. Parents and community members have also been welcomed to "Colorbrave" conversations about race for several years.

"It gets messy sometimes, because this is not easy work or comfortable work," says Faybra Hemphill, one of City Garden's directors.

Lacey recalls how her first ABAR training caused "a desperate need to fix everything." It uncovered her ignorance, she says. She wanted to make sure she wasn't giving one race preference over another. "I am questioning every decision I make. Every time I raise my voice, every child who gets in trouble, every child who gets praised." 

Talking About Race Openly

Black Girls Rock is a group of students that meets once a month to counter unfair social messages. At one meeting, Evans read them a picture book celebrating different skin tones among African-Americans.

Evans passed a mirror around, asking each girl to look into it. She told them to declare: "I'm a beautiful black girl." Some did it quickly while others added words like "awesome."

City Garden students say they make friends of different races. Still, one teachable moment came up this school year. 

Some black students were excited about creating a business to make play slime. They thought of it proudly as a black-owned business, but some white students wanted to be part of it.

"They had this very mature debate," Evans says.

Some white students helped other white students understand they were overstepping because the black students had expressed a desire to keep it black-run. 

A student suggested a solution. The business leaders could call upon other students as "consultants" when they wanted help.

"That was a courageous conversation about race," Evans says.

Kim Dixon, a white mother, was impressed with what her daughter learned. "There are 30-, 40-year-old people that still don't get that concept … that oppressed people need their own space," Dixon says. People who are oppressed are restricted in what they can do. People can be oppressed because of their skin color, religion or gender. Black Americans were oppressed by white Americans for a very long time. That is why the community should be allowed to do things for themselves.

Guide Jori Martinez-Wood thinks students can handle the conversations. "If we continue with this belief that children are too young," she says, "what we're saying is, 'We want to perpetuate this for another generation.'"

Outcomes Of Successful Integration

For integrated charter schools, it's a challenge to maintain a balance of races. When the school becomes popular, wealthier parents apply, says Debs from Yale.

City Garden has been able to maintain a mix of races, with about 50 percent white students. However, its low-income population, once more than half the school, has shrunk to 39 percent.

The school has asked state lawmakers to change the system for student admissions, hoping a new way could maintain a balance of low-income students.

Nelson, who started as a guide at City Garden this year, has been pleasantly surprised by the school's devotion to anti-bias, anti-racist work.

Still, he says, "I'm waiting for the day that we don't have to have ABAR training."
