Black Lives Matters signs made of popsicle sticks: Missouri school works for racial equity

Lead "guide" Anne Lacey sits on the rug, teaching her wiggly cluster of first- to third-graders. She's white, with wavy hair and glasses. Robert Nelson, the assistant guide (a Montessori term for teachers), checks a boy's math. He's African-American, with a shaved head and black beard.

At City Garden Montessori School in St. Louis, Missouri, the staff and students reflect the racial mix of the nearby neighborhoods that get preference in the admissions lottery.

One School's Pioneering Nature

The everyday moments hint at the school's pioneering nature — like the time children found popsicle sticks and made mini "Black Lives Matter" signs.

The school is less than 20 miles from Ferguson, Missouri, where the police killing of African-American teenager Michael Brown in 2014 sparked the "Black Lives Matter" movement across the United States.

City Garden's mission includes not only racial and economic balance, but also "anti-bias, anti-racist" education, or ABAR, a term used by the Illinois-based Crossroads Anti-Racism Organizing and Training.

"We no longer have the privilege of pretending that race doesn't matter," says Nicole Evans, the school's African-American principal.

Montessori is a child-centered approach to school started in Rome, Italy. The United States has an estimated 4,000 Montessori schools, 500 of them public. Among those 500, about 55 percent are charter schools, according to a study by Mira Debs, executive director of the Education Studies Program at Yale University.

Charter schools are different from traditional public schools. While both are funded by taxpayers, charter schools are independently operated and public schools are operated by a public school board. 

Numbers show school integration hasn't been a focus for most charter schools. However, City Garden is one of 125 U.S. charter schools identified as "diverse by design," or racially balanced, by The Century Foundation in a report published May 15.

Interest in anti-racism work in Montessori schools is growing. Hundreds now attend the annual conference of Montessori for Social Justice, a group City Garden leaders helped create.

Bringing Race To The Surface "Gets Messy"

City Garden started in 1995 as a private Montessori preschool. In 2008, black and white parents helped create the charter school to offer an integrated public Montessori through eighth grade. The city schools had large concentrations of students of color, while the local private schools skewed white.

Last December, it became the first charter in Missouri to gain a 10-year renewal, based on high marks. One commitment in its new charter is taking specific steps to close racial gaps on state tests.

When Evans arrived as principal, the staff had recently begun anti-bias training, but she says it still needs to make sure black students are as successful as whites.

This has involved about 20 hours of anti-bias, or ABAR, training each summer, and regular professional development sessions. Parents and community members have also been welcomed to "Colorbrave" conversations about race for several years.

"It gets messy sometimes, because this is not easy work or comfortable work," says Faybra Hemphill, one of City Garden's directors.

Lacey recalls how her first ABAR training caused "a desperate need to fix everything." It uncovered her ignorance, she says. She wanted to make sure she wasn't giving one race preference over another. "I am questioning every decision I make. Every time I raise my voice, every child who gets in trouble, every child who gets praised." 

Talking About Race Openly

Black Girls Rock is a group of students that meets once a month to counter negative social messages. At one meeting, Evans read them a picture book celebrating different skin tones among African-Americans.

Evans passed a mirror around, asking each to look and declare: "I'm a beautiful black girl." Some did it hastily while others added words like "awesome."

City Garden students say they do make friends across racial lines. Still, one teachable moment came up this school year. 

Some black students in a fourth- to sixth-grade class were excited about creating a business to make play slime. They thought of it proudly as a black-owned business, but some white students wanted to be part of it.

"They had this very mature debate," Evans says.

Some white students helped other white students understand they were overstepping, because the black students had expressed a desire to keep it black-run. 

A student suggested the solution that the business leaders could call upon other students as "consultants" when they wanted help.

"That was a courageous conversation about race," Evans says.

Kim Dixon, a white mother, was impressed with her daughter's takeaways. "There are 30-, 40-year-old people that still don't get that concept … that oppressed people need their own space," Dixon says.

Guide Jori Martinez-Wood thinks students can handle the conversations. "If we continue with this belief that children are too young," she says, "what we're saying is, 'We want to perpetuate this for another generation.'"

Outcomes of Successful Integration

For integrated charter schools, it's a challenge to maintain racial balance as word gets out and wealthier parents apply, says Debs from Yale.

City Garden has been able to maintain a racial mix, with about 50 percent white students, but its low-income population, once more than half the
