A Missouri school works to make all students equal

Anne Lacey sits on the rug at the City Garden school. She is a guide for the school in St. Louis, Missouri. A "guide" is what the school calls a teacher. 

Lacey teaches first- to third-grade students. She is white, with wavy hair and glasses. 

Robert Nelson is another guide in the classroom. He checks a boy's math. He is African-American and has a beard.

The school's teachers reflect the mix of races living near the school. Students from nearby are picked more often to go to the school.

Balance Of All Races

The school wants a balance of all races. Nicole Evans is the school's principal. She is African-American. She says the school knows race matters. This year, students used popsicle sticks to make mini "Black Lives Matter" signs. It is a movement to stop violence and racism against the black community.

Charter schools are different from most public schools. Public schools are run by a public school board. They are voted in by people in the city. Charter schools work on their own. They choose their students.

Studies show many charter schools do not have students of different races. City Garden is one school that tries to get students of all races.

Bringing Race To The Surface "Gets Messy"

In 2008, black and white parents created City Garden. The city's public schools had mostly students of color. Private schools were mostly white. City Garden wanted a mix.

"It gets messy sometimes," says Faybra Hemphill. She is one of City Garden's leaders. She says people can be uncomfortable talking about race. Each summer, the school's teachers do 20 hours of training. The training is for anti-bias, anti-racism education, or ABAR. 

Lacey says her first ABAR training changed her. She thought more about her decisions. She questioned every time students got in trouble or were rewarded. She wanted to make sure she was not acting nicer to one race. 

Talking About Race Openly

City Garden students say they make friends of different races. Still, hard situations come up. 

This year, some black students created a company making play slime. They wanted it to be a black-owned company but white students felt left out.

Evans says the students talked, and one had an idea. Company leaders often want help from workers at other companies. These workers are called consultants. The black students could ask the white students to be consultants. Evans says having that talk was brave.

Kim Dixon, a white mother, was impressed. She said her daughter learned. Dixon says some grown-ups do not understand this idea. People who have been treated differently because of their race need chances to work on their own.
