McDonald's to swap plastic straws for environmentally friendly option

McDonald's is making a big move to help the environment. On June 15, they announced they will ditch plastic straw use in select restaurants in the United States. Instead, those restaurants will be testing alternatives to plastic straws. 

Environmental groups have put a lot of pressure on McDonald's. They have been pushing them to change.

The burger giant will start using paper straws in the United Kingdom (UK) and Ireland. They will start in September. McDonald's has 1,361 restaurants there. It began testing paper straws there earlier this year.

Plastic Doesn't Break Down Easily

Plastic straws can only be used once. They don't easily break down in landfills. Also, most people don't really need them to drink. Paper straws are just as good. Straws can also be made out of straw and even seaweed.

Every day, McDonald's gives out millions of plastic straws, said SumOfUs. The group is a nonprofit. They work on a number of causes. Protecting the environment is one of these causes. Customers use plastic straws once and throw them away. They litter beaches, block waterways and fill trash dumps.

Taking The Lead

Francesca DeBiase is a top official with McDonald's. She said that McDonald's wants to be a good influence in the world. It is working to find a solution to the problem of plastic straws. McDonald's hopes other fast-food chains will follow its lead and stop using them.

McDonald's said it began using paper straws in Belgium. Later this year, it will begin trying them in France, Sweden and Norway. In Malaysia, McDonald's found a new way to give out straws. Customers will only get one if they ask.

The McDonald's decision is important for the environment, said Michael Gove. He is a UK government official. He runs the department in charge of protecting the environment. Gove wants more companies to say no to plastic straws.

Ditch The Plastic Stirrers While You're At It

Other major straw users are also tossing them out. Royal Caribbean is a large cruise ship company. It promised to get rid of them by the end of this year. Alaska Airlines is getting rid of plastic drink stirrers starting next month. Bon Appétit Management is a major food service company in the United States. It will stop using plastic straws and stirrers by September 2019.

Governments are also going after plastic straws. Both California and New York City are thinking about making them against the law.

Eric Goldstein is a lawyer for the Natural Resources Defense Council. It is an environmental group. McDonald's is a huge company. The decision from such a large company is important, he said. It shows that people are worried about plastic straws worldwide.

Symbolic Step

It's a good step and a symbolic one, he said. "Symbols are important."

"You could say it should've been done earlier," Goldstein said. "It's certainly better late than never."
