McDonald's to get rid of environmentally unfriendly straws

Plastic straws hurt the environment. They litter beaches. They block waterways. They fill up garbage dumps.

McDonald's is making a big move. It is taking a stand against plastic straws. Some McDonald's restaurants in the United States will stop using plastic straws. They are going to test out another kind of straw. It will not be plastic.

McDonald's made the announcement on June 15.

Landfills Full Of Straws

Plastic straws are used just once. They end up in landfills. And they do not break down easily. They last for a long, long time. 

Most people do not need plastic straws. Other straws work just as well. Paper straws are one example. 

SumOfUs is a charity group. They work on many causes. One of these causes is protecting the Earth. SumOfUs said McDonald's gives out millions of straws every day. Customers use their straws once. Then they throw them away. It is wasteful. 

Replacing With Paper Straws

Francesca DeBiase works for McDonald's. She is a top leader at the company. She said McDonald's wants to set an example. The company hopes other places will stop using plastic straws, too.

McDonald's is not only in the U.S. It has restaurants around the world. The company is already trying paper straws in Europe. It started using them in Belgium. Next, it will give them out in the United Kingdom. Ireland will get paper straws, too. 

Later this year, McDonald's will start trying them in other countries. France, Sweden and Norway will test them. In Malaysia, McDonald's is trying something different. Malaysia is a country in Asia. Customers there can get a plastic straw. They will have to ask for it, though. 

Other companies are also tossing straws. Royal Caribbean runs cruises. It promised to get rid of plastic straws. So did Alaska Airlines.

Governments are also taking action. California may pass a new law. The law will ban plastic straws. Restaurants will not be able to use them. New York City may pass this law, too. 

People Care About This Issue

Eric Goldstein works for an environmental group. It is called the Natural Resources Defense Council. 

McDonald's is a huge company. It took an important step, Mr. Goldstein said. It shows people care. They are worried about the issue.

Maybe McDonald's should have stopped earlier. It is better late than never, Mr. Goldstein said.
