McDonald's is taking a big step in helping the environment. On June 15, they announced they will test alternatives to plastic straws in the United States. They will be tested in select restaurants. 

Environmentalists have been putting pressure on McDonald's to make the change.

The burger giant also said it will start using paper straws in the United Kingdom (UK) and Ireland in September. It has 1,361 restaurants there and began testing them earlier this year.

Straws Aren't Really Necessary

The problem with plastic straws is they can be only used once. They don't break down easily in landfills. They also aren't necessary for gulping down soft drinks. 

SumOfUs is a nonprofit group that works on many causes including protecting the environment. It estimates that every day, McDonald's gives out millions of plastic straws. Customers soon throw them out. They litter beaches, block waterways and fill trash dumps.

Francesca DeBiase is a top official with McDonald's. She said that McDonald's is committed to having a good influence. It is working to find a solution to the problem of plastic straw use around the world. McDonald's hopes other fast-food chains will follow its lead and stop using them.

McDonald's said it has been dabbling in disposable straws in Belgium, too. Later this year, it will also begin trying them in France, Sweden and Norway. Disposable straws are made out of other materials, as well, like paper and seaweed. In Malaysia, McDonald's will try a new way to give out straws. Customers will only get one if they ask.

It Takes Big Names To Make Big Changes

The McDonald's move is important for the environment, said Michael Gove. He is the head of environmental affairs in the UK. "We want more companies to say no to unnecessary single-use plastics."

McDonald's isn't the only major straw user to start tossing them out. Royal Caribbean, the cruise ship company, has promised to get rid of them by the end of this year. Other cruise companies have made similar pledges, as well. Alaska Airlines is getting rid of plastic drink stirrers starting next month. Bon Appétit Management is a major food service company. It says it will stop using plastic straws and stirrers by September 2019.

Governments are also going after plastic straws. Both California and New York City are thinking about banning them.

Worried About Impact Of Plastics

Eric Goldstein is a lawyer for the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group. McDonald's is a huge company and anything it does is important, he said. It shows that people are worried about the impact of plastic straws worldwide.

It's a good step and a symbolic one, he said. Symbols are important."

"You could say it should've been done earlier," Goldstein said. "It's certainly better late than never."
