McDonald's takes the lead with plan to end plastic straws in restaurants

Plastic straws are bad for the environment. They litter beaches. They also block waterways and fill garbage dumps.

Now, McDonald's may stop using them. The burger giant plans to try out alternative straws in the United States. They will be testing them in select restaurants. 

McDonald's made the announcement on June 15. Environment groups put a lot of pressure on the company to make this decision.

Wasteful Plastic

There are big problems with plastic straws. They are wasteful. They don't break down in landfills. Also, most people don't need them. Paper straws work just as well as plastic. Straws can also be made out of straw and even seaweed.

Every day, McDonald's gives out millions of plastic straws, said the nonprofit group SumOfUs. This group works on a number of causes. Protecting the environment is one of them. Customers use plastic straws once. Then they throw the straws away.

McDonald's will give people paper straws in the United Kingdom (UK) and Ireland. It has 1,361 restaurants there.

Becoming A Good Influence

Francesca DeBiase is a top official with McDonald's. McDonald's wants to be a good influence, she said.  It hopes other fast-food chains will stop using them.

McDonald's already began using eco-friendly straws in Belgium. Later this year, it will try them out in France, Sweden and Norway. The straws can also be made out of other materials. There are straws made out of real straw and even seaweed. In Malaysia, McDonald's found a new way to give out straws. Customers can get one. But they will have to ask for it.

McDonald's Is Not Alone

The McDonald's decision is important, said Michael Gove. He is a government official in the UK. He runs the department that takes care of the environment. Gove wants more companies to say no to plastic straws.

Other companies are also tossing them out. Royal Caribbean owns large cruise ships. It promised to get rid of them by the end of this year. Alaska Airlines is getting rid of plastic drink stirrers.

California and New York are also going after plastic straws. They want people to stop using them. Both places may make them against the law.

Better Late Than Never

Eric Goldstein is with the Natural Resources Defense Council. It is an environmental group. McDonald's is a huge company, he said. Its decision was important. It means people are worried about plastic straws worldwide.

Maybe, McDonald's should have started using them earlier. Still, it's better late than never, he said.
