More animals are becoming night owls

Some animals move around most at night. They sleep in the day. Then they are active after dark. There is a name for these animals. They are called nocturnal. Many owls are nocturnal. So are bats, cats and raccoons.  

Not all animals are nocturnal, of course. Some move around most during the day. But a new study says many of these daytime animals are changing. Now, they are hiding out during the day. They are moving around more at night. 

What is causing the change? People are, the study says. 

Staying Away From People

Scientists know that people affect how animals act. Animals keep a close watch when people are near. They spend less time looking for food. Sometimes people move to places where animals live. Then the animals may move away. They try to get as far away as possible. Other animals may stay, but move around less. They do not want to run into people. These meetings can be dangerous. 

A group of scientists did a study. They learned something new. All human activity affects how animals behave. Even activities like hiking and camping can make animals afraid. These activities do not seem so bad. It does not seem like they would harm animals. But they are having an effect. They are causing animals to be less active during the day. These animals are choosing to move around at night, instead. That is when most people are asleep.

"Animals might be playing it safe around people," said Kaitlyn Gaynor. She is a scientist. She works for the University of California. 

Ms. Gaynor led the study. "We may think that we leave no trace when we're just hiking in the woods," she said. But the study found this is not true. Everything people do affects animals. That includes just being in the woods.

Animals All Over The World

Ms. Gaynor worked with a team of scientists. They looked at 76 older studies. These studies were done on 62 kinds of animals. The animals lived all over the world. They included lions and otters. There were studies on coyotes, boars and more.

The scientists studied the movements of these animals. They figured out when the animals were moving the most. They also looked at what people were doing nearby. In some places, people were hiking or farming. In other places they were hunting. All of these activities made animals more active at night. It did not matter what the people were doing. If there were people around, animals were more likely to hide during the day. Then they came back out at night. 

Good Or Bad?

Is this good or bad for animals? It may be both. Ms. Gaynor said this change will be difficult for some animals. They are not used to moving around at night. Their lives may be harder now.

For other animals, the change might help, though. It may cut down their chance of running into people. This is safer for animals. It is safer for people, too. 

So maybe this is a safer way to share the planet. "Humans can do their thing during the day," Ms. Gaynor said. "Wildlife can do their thing at night."
