Shy and scared, animals are turning into daytime sleepers

Some animals move around most in the daytime. Others are more active at night. These nighttime creatures are nocturnal animals. Many owls are nocturnal. So are bats, cats and raccoons.

A new study has found that now many daytime animals are changing their behavior. They are moving around more at night. Lions, boars, bears and more are becoming night owls! What is causing this change? Humans are, the study says.

More Careful When People Are Around

Scientists have known for a long time that the things people do can affect animals. Animals are more careful when people are around. They spend less time looking for food. When people move to areas where animals live, the animals may move away. Some try to get as far as possible from people. Others just try to move around less. They do not want to run into people. 

In the new study, scientists learned something else: Even activities like hiking and camping can scare away animals. These activities may not seem disruptive. They are changing animal behavior, though. They are causing many animals to be less active during the day. These animals are choosing to move around at night, instead. That is when most people are asleep.

"Animals might be playing it safe around people," said Kaitlyn Gaynor. She is a scientist. Gaynor works at the University of California. She led the new study. 

Everything We Do Affects Animals

"We may think that we leave no trace when we're just hiking in the woods," Gaynor said. Yet the study found this is not the case. Just being in the woods can affect what animals do. 

For the new study, Gaynor worked with a team of scientists. They looked at the results of 76 older studies. These studies were done on 62 kinds of animals. They lived all over the world. The animals included lions and otters. There were studies of coyotes and wild boars.

Scientists looked at how much time these animals spent moving around at night. They compared amounts of nighttime activity when different kinds of human activities were happening where the animals lived. These activities included hunting, hiking, farming and more. 

The scientists found that all human activity caused the animals to increase their nighttime activity. It did not matter what the humans were doing. If there were people around, the animals started moving around more at night. They stayed hidden more in the day. This was even true of animals that usually sleep at night. 

Some Animals' Lives May Be Harder Now

What will happen to these animals? Gaynor said it will be hard for some to make the change. They are not used to moving around at night. Their lives may be harder now. 

For other animals, though, the change might be positive. It may reduce their chance of running into people. This is safer for the animals. It is safer for people, too. 

So this may be a safer way to share the planet. "Humans can do their thing during the day," Gaynor said. "Wildlife can do their thing at night."
