People are unknowingly changing animals' body clocks

A new study has found that lions, tigers, bears and more are changing their behavior. These animals are becoming night owls — and it is because of us, the study says.

Scientists have long known that human activity disturbs nature. When people are around, animals become more watchful. They spend less time out and about looking for food. They may choose to travel to distant areas or move around less, all to avoid contact with people.

Less Active In Daytime And More Active At Night

The latest study by scientists found something more. Even activities like hiking and camping can scare animals. These ordinary human activities can push animals to become less active in the daytime and more active at night. 

Lasting Consequences

"It suggests that animals might be playing it safe around people," said Kaitlyn Gaynor. She is an ecologist at the University of California, Berkeley. Gaynor led the new study. "We may think that we leave no trace when we're just hiking in the woods," she said. "But our mere presence can have lasting consequences."

For the new study, Gaynor and her team looked at the results of 76 earlier studies. These studies involved 62 kinds of animals on six continents. The animals included lions in Tanzania and otters in Brazil. There were studies of coyotes in California, wild boars in Poland and tigers in Nepal.

The scientists compared how much time those animals spent moving around at night when different kinds of human activity were happening around them. The activities included hunting, hiking and farming, among others. Overall, the scientists found that human activity caused the animals to increase their nighttime activity. They moved around more at night. This was true even of animals that usually sleep at night. The study results were published in a journal called Science. 

Unexpected Findings

Marlee Tucker is an ecologist at a university in Germany. She was not part of the study, but she read the results. Tucker was surprised by the study. She did not expect that any kind of human activity would be enough for animals to see people as dangerous.

"It's a little bit scary," she said. Even if people aren't trying to have an effect on animals, "we probably are without knowing it."

Difficult Time Adjusting

So what will happen to these animals? Gaynor said the animals that aren't used to living in darkness will have a difficult time adjusting. But she said that moving around at night could help other animals. It may reduce their chances of running into people. Sometimes these interactions are dangerous. They can lead to the person or the animal getting hurt.

"Humans can do their thing during the day; wildlife can do their thing at night," she said. That way, people would be sharing the planet with many animals "that are just taking the night shift while we're sleeping."
