From day to night: Animals feel safer away from people

Some animals are more active in the nighttime than in the daytime. They are known as nocturnal animals. Many owls are nocturnal. So are bats and raccoons.

A new study has found that many non-nocturnal animals are moving around more at night. Lions, tigers, boars, bears and more are becoming night owls! What is causing this change? Humans are, the study says.

Scientists have known for a long time that the things humans do can disturb nature. For example, when people are around, animals become more watchful. They spend less time out looking for food. When people move to areas where animals live, the animals may move away. Some try to get as far as possible from people. Others just try to move around less. They want to avoid contact with any humans who live nearby. 

Playing It Safe Around People

The new study found something more. Even activities like hiking and camping in the woods can change animals' behavior. These activities may not seem very disruptive. But they are pushing many animals to become less active in the daytime and more active at night.  

"Animals might be playing it safe around people," said Kaitlyn Gaynor. She is a scientist from California. She led the new study. "We may think that we leave no trace when we're just hiking in the woods," she said. But the study found that this is not the case. Just the presence of people in natural places can have consequences for animals. 

62 Kinds Of Animals

For the new study, Gaynor and her team looked at the results of 76 earlier studies. These studies involved 62 kinds of animals on six continents. The animals included lions and otters. There were studies of coyotes in California and wild boars in Europe.

Scientists looked at how much time these animals spent moving around at night. They compared the amount of nighttime activity when different kinds of human activities were happening where the animals lived. These activities included hunting, hiking, farming and more. 

Humans Increase Animals'  Nighttime Activity

The scientists found that any kind of human activity caused the animals to increase their nighttime activity. The animals moved around more at night. This was even true of animals that usually sleep at night. The study results were published in a science journal. 

Marlee Tucker is a scientist. She works at a university in Germany. Tucker was not part of the study, but she read the results. She was surprised to learn that any kind of human closeness is enough for animals to see people as dangerous.

"It's a little bit scary," Tucker said. Even if people aren't trying to have an effect on animals, "we probably are without knowing it."

What Will Happen To The Animals?

So what will happen to the animals? Gaynor said it will be difficult for animals that aren't used to moving around at night. They may have a hard time adjusting. But she said moving around at night could actually help the other animals. It may reduce the chance of running into people. Sometimes these interactions are dangerous. They can lead to the person or the animal getting hurt.

"Humans can do their thing during the day," she said. "Wildlife can do their thing at night." That way, people would be sharing the planet safely with many animals "that are just taking the night shift while we're sleeping."
