Mexico delivers rocking World Cup win over reigning champ Germany

MOSCOW — Close your eyes, and you would have sworn you were in Estadio Azteca, that crazy stadium in Mexico City, Mexico.

"Cielito Lindo," ended by the familiar "ay-ay-ay-ay" singalong, played before the World Cup game in Moscow, Russia, on Sunday, June 17.

There was also the unscripted noise created by tens of thousands of Mexican soccer supporters. Many came from homes in Mexico and the U.S.,  journeying incredible distances to watch perhaps the country's best team in years.

Mexican fans dressed in green easily outnumbered fans for the reigning champion Germany at Luzhniki Stadium in Russia.

When Hirving "Chucky" Lozano shattered the first-half deadlock, the only goal during the 1-0 stunner, you probably would have felt the splash of people spilling their drinks as they jumped in excitement.

Soccer Fans Shake It Up Back Home In Mexico

Back home in Mexico, seismologists said fans had registered a man-made earthquake, created by human celebration. That's a true story. Fans had jumped up so much when the goal was scored that earthquake sensors had picked up the movement. 

"I want to dedicate this great result to all the Mexican fans who made the journey out here, to people behind the scenes and to all the people who supported us," said coach Juan Carlos Osorio. He is from Colombia but has lived much of his adult life in the U.S.

"We will try to give them joy and, those who don't support us yet, we will work to convince them to join us."

This result - which delivered Germany its first opening defeat since 1982 - will help the cause.

Mexico has a rich soccer tradition, but major victories - and advancement - in the World Cup have escaped them. El Tri, as the team's known, has lost in the round of 16 every four years since 1994. 

Looking To Advance Beyond Group Play

After the World Cup's first-round of group play, the top two of four teams from each of the eight groups advance. Those 16 remaining teams play in a loser-go-home, single-elimination format until the championship. Mexico has advanced beyond group play each of the last six World Cups. After advancing, though, they have lost their next game every time.

This year, the Mexicans are in their best position to end the hex. By finishing first in Group F, they would avoid the likely Group E winner, Brazil, in the next round. First, though, they must earn points by either winning or tying against South Korea and Sweden.

"Nobody can tell us not to dream," goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa said. "We are here in this competition and we want to stay until the last day. We know it is going to be difficult, but we know that we can compete against any team."

They welcomed the lift from the rocking crowd.

"Since the anthem started," Ochoa said, referring to Mexico's national song, "everybody knew who the home team was."

With much of the 78,011 fans backing them, the Mexicans were unfazed by the four-time world champions and were the superior team in the first half.

German Coach Not Pleased With Team's Play

German coach Jochim Loew admitted his team "played very badly" in the first half.

Mexico, Osorio said, played carefully. His team let Germany control the ball. Yet when Germany turned it over to Mexico, Osorio's team launched attacks using its speedy wings, players that operate near the sidelines. Many promising chances at shots for Mexico dissolved once they reached Germany's final defenders. However, with so many chances, Mexico seemed close to breaking through.

In the 35th minute, a goal of quality in conception and execution came. A diagonal pass from Javier "Chicharito" Hernandez to Lozano, who was operating on the left side of the area in front of the goal.

Germany's Mesut Oezil cut him off. Lozano cut the ball back from his left foot to his right. With a swing of his right leg, he beat Manuel Neuer, Germany's elite goalkeeper, to the near corner of the goal.

"It's definitely the best goal I've ever scored in my entire life," said 22-year-old Lozano.

Germany's Toni Kroos threatened to even the score four minutes later, but his 25-yard free kick crashed off the crossbar.

In the second half, Hernandez failed to connect with Carlos Vela on a two-on-one, leaving the outcome in question. Germany applied almost unbearable pressure on Mexico's end for what seemed like hours. Mexico survived Germany's Julian Brandt's clever shot off the left post in the final minutes of play.

"We Played With Bravery"

The only other time Mexico had beaten Germany was in a 1985 friendly. This is a match that is not part of a high-profile tournament.

"We played with bravery when it was needed and we defended with all our hearts," Osorio said.

Germany, a tournament co-favorite with Brazil, will try to avoid being knocked out after the first round for the first time since 1938. Four years ago, the Germans didn't lose any games en route to the title in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Germany had 26 shots, the most by a team without scoring in a World Cup match since 2006.

Asked if he was worried about an early departure, Loew said, "We will not suffer that fate."

Mexico has a brighter outlook.

"We have to stay calm. We want to get to the final," Hernandez said. "We have to go step by step. This was an important step."
