Mexico shakes up World Cup soccer play with win over favorite Germany

MOSCOW — The soccer stadium sounded like Estadio Azteca. That is the name of the stadium in Mexico City, Mexico. The Mexican team often plays there. This was Russia though. 

Tens of thousands of Mexico's soccer fans were at Luzhniki Stadium in Moscow, Russia. They watched Mexico play against Germany in the World Cup. The game was on Sunday, June 17.

Many fans traveled from Mexico. Some came from the United States. They came a long way to see what may be Mexico's best team in years.

Mexico's Fans Shake It Up Back Home

Mexico's fans dressed in green. They filled most of the stadium. They outnumbered fans for defending champion Germany.

The crowd cheered when Hirving "Chucky" Lozano scored in the first half. Back in Mexico, fans yelled and jumped. The ground shook. Scientists said they created a man-made earthquake. All the jumping around had alerted the sensors.

Lozano scored the only goal during Mexico's 1-0 stunner. A goal in soccer is worth 1 point. It happens when a player kicks the ball past the goalie into the net.

Mexico's coach Juan Carlos Osorio said the win was for his team's fans.

Mexico loves soccer. Still, the team has not won many big games in the World Cup. The Cup is played once every four years. It is soccer's biggest competition. Mexico has been one of the final 16 teams in every World Cup since 1994. Still, they have always lost the next game.

Mexico Players Dream Of Bigger Things

Now, Mexico is in its best position to end the curse.

"Nobody can tell us not to dream," goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa said. Ochoa and other players believe they are as good as any other team. 

The Mexican team welcomed the support from the crowd.

"Everybody knew who the home team was," Ochoa said.

Coach Osorio said Mexico played carefully. His team waited for Germany's mistakes. Mexico might steal a bad pass from Germany. Osorio's team then attacked with speed.

The Winning Goal In 1-0 Victory

Mexico scored a beautiful goal. It happened 35 minutes into the first half. Javier "Chicharito" Hernandez passed to Lozano. Lozano ran into the area in front of the goal.

Germany's Mesut Oezil cut him off. Lozano brought the ball from his left foot to his right. He shot the ball with his right foot just inside the post. Germany's goalkeeper Manuel Neuer could not reach it.

Lozano is 22 years old. He called it the best goal of his life. 

For the rest of the game, Mexico survived Germany's many efforts to score. Osorio said Mexico played bravely and "defended with all our hearts."
