Viva Mexico! National soccer team upsets Germany in World Cup play

MOSCOW — Close your eyes. You would have sworn you were in Estadio Azteca. That's the name of the stadium with crazy passionate soccer fans in Mexico City, Mexico.

The popular Mexican song "Cielito Lindo" played before the World Cup game in Moscow, Russia, on Sunday, June 17. It ended with the familiar "ay-ay-ay-ay" singalong. 

There was also the noise created by tens of thousands of Mexican soccer fans. Many came from homes in Mexico and the U.S.,  journeying incredible distances to watch perhaps the country's best team in years.

Mexican fans dressed in green easily outnumbered fans for the defending champion Germany at Luzhniki Stadium in Russia.

Victory Celebration Abroad And Back Home In Mexico

Then Hirving "Chucky" Lozano shattered the first-half deadlock with the only goal during a 1-0 stunner. People were splashed with drinks as the fans jumped with joy.

Back home in Mexico, people who measure earthquakes said fans had registered a man-made earthquake, created by human celebration. That's a true story. Fans had jumped up so much when the goal was scored that earthquake sensors had picked up the movement. 

"I want to dedicate this great result to all the Mexican fans who made the journey out here," said coach Juan Carlos Osorio. He is from Colombia but has lived much of his adult life in the U.S.

"We will try to give them joy and, those who don't support us yet, we will work to convince them to join us."

Germany Hadn't Lost Opening Match Since 1982

This result - which delivered Germany its first opening defeat since 1982 - will help the cause.

Mexico has a rich soccer tradition, but major victories in the World Cup have escaped them. El Tri, as the team's known, has lost in the round of 16 every four years since 1994. 

After the World Cup's first-round group play, the top two of four teams from each of the eight groups advance. Those 16 remaining teams play in a loser-go-home, single-elimination format until the championship. Mexico has advanced beyond group play each of the last six World Cups. After advancing, though, they have lost their next game every time.

This year, the Mexicans are in their best position to end the hex. By finishing first in Group F, they would avoid the likely Group E winner, Brazil, in the next round. First, though, they must earn points by either winning or tying against South Korea and Sweden.

"We Can Compete Against Any Team"

"Nobody can tell us not to dream," goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa said. "We are here in this competition and we want to stay until the last day. We know it is going to be difficult, but we know that we can compete against any team."

They welcomed the lift from the rocking crowd.

"Since the anthem started," Ochoa said, referring to Mexico's national song, "everybody knew who the home team was."

With much of the 78,011 fans backing them, the Mexicans were unfazed by the four-time world champions. Mexico was the superior team in the first half.

German coach Jochim Loew admitted his team "played very badly" in the first half.

Mexico, Osorio said, played carefully. His team let Germany control the ball. Yet when Germany turned it over to Mexico, Osorio's team launched attacks using its speedy wings, players that operate near the sidelines. Many promising chances at shots for Mexico dissolved once they reached Germany's final defenders. However, with so many chances, Mexico seemed close to breaking through.

The Winning Goal For Mexico

In the 35th minute, a goal of quality in conception and execution came. A diagonal pass from Javier "Chicharito" Hernandez to Lozano, who was operating on the left side of the area in front of the goal.

Germany's Mesut Oezil cut him off. Lozano cut the ball back from his left foot to his right. With a swing of his right leg, he beat Manuel Neuer, Germany's goalkeeper, to the near corner of the goal.

"It's definitely the best goal I've ever scored in my entire life," said 22-year-old Lozano.

Germany's Toni Kroos threatened to even the score four minutes later. However, his 25-yard free kick crashed off the crossbar.

In the second half, Mexico survived Germany's many efforts to score. This included Germany's Julian Brandt's clever shot off the left post in the final minutes.

"We Defended With All Our Hearts"

"We played with bravery when it was needed and we defended with all our hearts," Osorio said.

Germany entered the tournament as the co-favorite with Brazil. Now it will try to avoid being knocked out after the first round for the first time since 1938.

Mexico has a brighter outlook.

"We want to get to the final," Hernandez said. "We have to go step by step. This was an important step."
