Mexico delivers a World Cup earthquake with defeat of Germany

MOSCOW — Close your eyes, and you would have sworn you had stepped into Estadio Azteca, that crazy stadium in Mexico City.

"Cielito Lindo," punctuated by the familiar "ay-ay-ay-ay" singalong, graced the sound system during World Cup pregame frolicking here Sunday, June 17.

There was also the unscripted noise, that incredible boom that rattles the brain, created by tens of thousands of Mexican soccer supporters, many from homes in the United States, who have journeyed extraordinary distances to watch perhaps the country's most capable team.

Open your eyes, and you would have seen section after section glazed in green, up and down Luzhniki Stadium, easily outnumbering those backing the opposition, reigning champion Germany.

And when Hirving "Chucky" Lozano shattered the first-half deadlock - the only breakthrough needed during a 1-0 stunner - you probably would have felt the splash of Azteca's drink-spraying tradition, a sheet of suds splashing below. Offenders were forgiven.

Back home, seismologists said they had registered a man-made earthquake, created by human celebration. True story.

"I want to dedicate this great result to all the Mexican fans who made the journey out here, to people behind the scenes and to all the people who supported us," said Coach Juan Carlos Osorio, a Colombian who has lived much of his adult life in the United States.

"We will try to give them joy and, those who don't support us yet, we will work to convince them to join us."

This result - which inflicted Germany with its first opening defeat since 1982 - will help the cause.

Mexico has a rich soccer tradition, but major victories - and advancement - in the World Cup have been elusive. El Tri, as the team is known, has lost in the round of 16 every four years since 1994.

This year, the Mexicans are in prime position to end the hex. By finishing first in Group F, they would avoid the likely Group E winner, Brazil, in the next round. First, though, they must earn points against South Korea and Sweden.

"Nobody can tell us not to dream," goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa said. "We are here in this competition and we want to stay until the last day. We know it is going to be difficult, but we know that we can compete against any team."

They welcomed the lift from the rocking crowd.

"Since the anthem started," Ochoa said, "everybody knew who the home team was."

With much of the 78,011 backing them, the Mexicans were unfazed by the four-time world champions and were the superior side in the first half.

German Coach Jochim Loew conceded that his team "played very badly" in the opening 45 minutes.

Mexico, Osorio said, "managed to play defensively with a great deal of intelligence and to hunt them on the counter."

His team yielded possession and waited for moments to launch quick and confident counterattacks through its speedy wings. Promising forays dissolved in the final third of the attack, but something in green was brewing.

In the 35th minute, a goal of quality in conception and execution. A combination, a diagonal ball from Javier "Chicharito" Hernandez, and Lozano was operating on the left side of the penalty area.

Mesut Oezil cut him off. Lozano cut the ball back. With a swing of his right leg, he beat Manuel Neuer, Germany's elite goalkeeper, to the near corner.

Delirium on the banks of the Moscow River, euphoria across a distant continent.

"It's definitely the best goal I've ever scored in my entire life," said Lozano, a 22-year-old attacker who plays professionally for PSV Eindhoven in the Netherlands.

Germany's Toni Kroos threatened to level the score four minutes later, but his 25-yard free kick crashed off the crossbar.

In the second half, Hernandez failed to connect with Carlos Vela on a two-on-one, leaving the outcome in question. Germany applied almost unbearable pressure for what seemed like hours. Mexico bent but did not break, surviving Julian Brandt's clever touch off the left post in the 89th minute and German desperation in stoppage time.

The only other time Mexico had beaten Germany was in a 1985 friendly.

"The phrase today was: to play for the love of winning, not for the fear of losing," Osorio said. "We played with bravery when it was needed and we defended with all our hearts."

Germany, a tournament co-favorite with Brazil, must earn at least four points from the last two group matches to avoid first-round elimination for the first time since 1938. Four years ago, the Germans did not lose any games and, en route to the title in Rio de Janeiro, they defeated France, Brazil and Argentina.

Germany had 26 shots, the most by a team without scoring in a World Cup match since 2006.

Asked if he were worried about an early departure, Loew responded without a hint of uncertainty: "We will not suffer that fate."

Mexico has a brighter outlook.

"Our objective is in the long term," Hernandez said. "We have to stay calm. We want to get to the final. We have to go step by step. This was an important step."
