Viva Mexico! Soccer team scores World Cup victory over Germany

MOSCOW — Close your eyes. You would have thought you were in Estadio Azteca. That's the name of the soccer stadium in Mexico City, Mexico.

The popular Mexican song "Cielito Lindo" played before the World Cup game. Mexico played Germany in Luzhniki Stadium in Moscow, Russia, on Sunday, June 17.

There was also the noise from tens of thousands of Mexico's soccer fans, many from Mexico and the U.S. They journeyed incredible distances to watch perhaps the country's best team in years.

Mexican fans dressed in green. They easily outnumbered fans for the defending champion Germany.

Cheers Erupt In Stadium And In Mexico

Then Hirving "Chucky" Lozano shattered the first-half deadlock. It was the only goal during a 1-0 stunner. Cheers erupted all over the stadium.

Back in Mexico, people who measure earthquakes said fans had registered a man-made earthquake, created by human celebration. That's a true story. Fans had jumped up so much when the goal was scored that earthquake sensors had picked up the movement. 

"I want to dedicate this great result to all the Mexican fans," said Mexico's coach Juan Carlos Osorio.

"We will try to give them joy and, those who don't support us yet, we will work to convince them to join us."

Mexico has a rich soccer tradition, but major victories in the World Cup have escaped them. El Tri, as the team's known, has lost in the round of 16 every four years since 1994. This is when only 16 teams are left to compete.

Advancing On In Group Play

After the World Cup's first-round group play, the top two of four teams from each of the eight groups advance. Those 16 remaining teams play in a loser-go-home format until the championship. Mexico has advanced beyond group play the last six World Cups. After advancing, though, they have always lost their next game.

This year, the Mexicans are in their best position to end the hex. By finishing first in Group F, they would avoid the likely Group E winner, Brazil, in the next round. First, though, they must earn points against South Korea and Sweden. They need to either tie or win to earn points.

"Nobody can tell us not to dream," goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa said. "We know it is going to be difficult, but we know that we can compete against any team."

They welcomed the lift from the crowd. Fans cheered from the beginning of the game.

"Everybody knew who the home team was," Ochoa said.

Mexico Had The Better Team On This Day

With much of the 78,011 fans backing them, the Mexican team was unfazed by the four-time world champion Germany. Mexico was the superior team in the first half.

German coach Jochim Loew was disappointed with his team's first-half play. They "played very badly," he said.

Mexico, Osorio said, played carefully. His team let Germany control the ball. Yet when Germany turned it over to Mexico, Osorio's team launched attacks using its speedy wings, players that play along the sidelines. Many promising chances at shots for Mexico dissolved once they reached Germany's final defenders. However, with so many chances, Mexico was close to breaking through.

In the 35th minute, a beautiful goal came. Javier "Chicharito" Hernandez passed to Lozano, who ran to the left side of the area in front of the goal.

Germany's Mesut Oezil cut him off. Lozano shifted direction quickly. He brought the ball from his left foot to his right. With a swing of his right leg, he kicked it just inside the post and past Germany's goalkeeper Manuel Neuer.

"The Best Goal I've Ever Scored"

"It's definitely the best goal I've ever scored in my entire life," said Lozano, age 22.

Germany's Toni Kroos almost tied the score four minutes later. However, his 25-yard shot crashed off the crossbar. In the second half, Mexico survived Germany's many efforts to score. 

"We played with bravery when it was needed and we defended with all our hearts," Osorio said.

Germany entered the tournament as the co-favorite with Brazil. Now it will try to avoid being knocked out after the first round for the first time since 1938.

Mexico has a brighter outlook.

"We want to get to the final," Hernandez said. "We have to go step by step. This was an important step."
