What does it mean? It's up to you, says artist behind barrel artwork

Christo is a famous artist. On Monday, he opened his new art sculpture in London, England. It is made from 7,506 barrels. They are all different colors, and they are all floating on a lake. The artwork is a mystery. People aren't sure what it means. If Christo knows, he's not telling. He hopes his artwork will get people to start talking.

The name of the piece is "The London Mastaba." It is his first big outdoor art exhibit in Great Britain.

The artwork is in the shape of a mastaba. A mastaba is a type of ancient Egyptian tomb. "The London Mastaba" looks somewhat like a pyramid with a flat top. It is about 65 feet high, 98 feet wide and 130 feet long. It is very heavy! It weighs about 1.3 million pounds. The barrels are made out of metal. They can be seen from a long way away.

Barrels Stacked On A Platform In The Lake

The barrels are stacked on a platform in the middle of the lake. The platform is held in place with anchors.

There are red barrels with white candy stripes. Others are colored blue, purple and red. Their colors will look different at different times of the day.

People are wondering what the artwork means. Many think the barrels look like barrels of oil. Since the barrels are in a park, some believe the message is about pollution. 

Christo is 83 years old. He was born in Bulgaria. Bulgaria is a country in Europe. He is a U.S. citizen, though. He won't tell anyone what the artwork might mean, or if it means anything at all. Everyone has to discover it for themselves, he said.

Famous For Wrapping Large Structures In Cloth

Christo is famous for his large artworks. He is especially known for wrapping large structures in cloth. In 1985, he created "The Pont Neuf Wrapped." He wrapped the oldest bridge in Paris, France.

"The London Mastaba" will stay in the lake until September 23. Then the barrels will be taken down and recycled.

The artwork has gotten a lot of attention. Many people were surprised to see it.

Yasmin Koz Ozcengel is from Turkey. She said it's very modern and she does not think a park is a good place for it. The park is full of nature and history.

Not Sure How She Feels About The Artwork

Sheila Steffenson is an American living in London. She isn't sure how she feels about it. Steffenson said she wonders what it means, although it might not mean anything. Maybe it's about pollution, she said. "Who knows?"
