Artist wants viewers to find their own meaning in floating barrel artwork

Christo is a famous artist. On Monday, he opened his new art sculpture. It is made from 7,506 colorful barrels, and they are floating on a lake in Hyde Park, London. It is pretty mysterious. He hopes his artwork will get people to start talking to each other.

Christo is calling it "The London Mastaba." It is his first major outdoor art installation in Great Britain. It is different from a painting. While a painting is done on a canvas on paper, an installation is not. It is made from different objects.

Shaped Like A Pyramid With A Flat Top

The artwork is in the shape of a mastaba, which is a type of ancient Egyptian tomb. It looks somewhat like a pyramid with a flat top. "The London Mastaba" is about 65 feet high, 98 feet wide and 130 feet long. It is very heavy. It weighs about 1.3 million pounds. The barrels are made out of metal. They can be seen from hundreds of feet away.

Already, people are wondering what the artwork means. Many look at it and think about barrels of oil in a park. Maybe Christo was making a statement about pollution.

Others will see giant pixels or maybe simply a shape.

Everyone Must Decide For Themselves What It Means

Christo says everyone must decide for themselves. Christo is 83 years old. He was born in Bulgaria. It is a country in Europe. He is now a U.S. citizen. Christo said he wasn't thinking about anything special when he created the artwork.

"There are no messages," Christo said. "There is something in it to discover yourself. I cannot direct you. You should develop your senses."

Christo is known for wrapping large structures in fabric. In 1985, he created "The Pont Neuf Wrapped." It involved wrapping the oldest bridge in Paris, France. In 1995, he did the same thing in "Wrapped Reichstag" at the parliament building in Berlin. The parliament is where German lawmakers meet. He has also used barrels in his artwork in the past.

"An Enormous Invitation"

Christo was standing on the bank of the lake in Hyde Park, where his artwork floats. Swans swim nearby. "It's created an enormous invitation, like a stairway to the sky," Christo said.

The barrels are on a platform in the middle of the lake. The platform is held in place with anchors.

There are red barrels with a white candy stripe on the sides. Others are colored blue, purple and red.

Their colors will look different as the sun moves in the sky, Christo said. The artwork will reflect in the lake and look like an abstract painting. Abstract art does not always show objects, people or places as they really look.

Christo paid for "The London Mastaba" on his own. It will stay in place until September 23. Then the barrels will be taken down and recycled.

"It's Very Modern"

In Hyde Park, many people were surprised to see the artwork.

"It's very modern, but this place is nature and historical. I don't like it here," said Yasmin Koc Ozcengel. She is a tourist from Turkey.

Anna Andronova said that "The London Mastaba" is a brave piece of art. If it weren't so brave, it wouldn't be as amazing.  

Sheila Steffenson is an American living in London. She said, "I'm sitting here pondering what in the world does it mean, if it means anything.

"I'm just not really sure how I feel about it. Maybe it's a message about pollution. Who knows?"
