Mysterious barrel artwork in London sparks thought, conversation

On Monday, the artist Christo opened his new art exhibition. The installation is made up of  7,506 colorful barrels floating on a lake in Hyde Park in London. The piece is pretty mysterious, and he hopes it will start a debate.

Christo is calling it "The London Mastaba." It is his first major outdoor art installation in Great Britain. Unlike a painting created on a canvas, an installation is created out of different objects.

The artwork is in the shape of a mastaba, a type of ancient Egyptian tomb. It looks somewhat like a pyramid with a flat top. "The London Mastaba" is about 65 feet high, 98 feet wide and 130 feet long, and it weighs about 1.3 million pounds. The metal barrels are visible from hundreds of feet away.

A Statement Against Pollution?

Everyone who looks at it will see something different. Many will think the barrels are barrels of oil in the heart of one of London's oldest parks. They might wonder if Christo was making a statement against pollution.

Others will see a prism or giant pixels or simply a shape.

However, everyone must decide for themselves, Christo said. The artist is 83 years old and was born in Bulgaria, although he is now a U.S. citizen. Christo said he had nothing special in mind when he created "The London Mastaba."

"There are no messages," Christo said. "There is something in it to discover yourself. I cannot direct you."

Christo is known for wrapping large structures in fabric. In 1985, he created "The Pont Neuf Wrapped," which involved wrapping the oldest bridge in Paris, France. In 1995, he did the same thing in "Wrapped Reichstag" at the parliament building in Berlin, Germany. The parliament is where German lawmakers meet.

"A Stairway To The Sky"

"It's created an enormous invitation, like a stairway to the sky," Christo said. The artist was standing on the banks of the Serpentine Lake in Hyde Park where his artwork floats. Swans are swimming nearby.

The barrels are stacked up on a platform and are held in place with anchors.

Some barrels are red with a white candy stripe on the sides. Others are colored blue, purple and red.

Their colors will look different as the light changes, Christo said. Their reflection in the lake will be like an abstract painting. Abstraction is an artistic style that does not always show something recognizable or realistic. Instead, it emphasizes shapes, colors, lines and textures.

Barrels Are Cheap And Interesting

The artist has used barrels in his art before because they are cheap and interesting to look at.

In 1962, he blocked off a Paris street with a wall of barrels. He was responding to the Berlin Wall. At the time, Berlin was divided between the countries of West Germany and East Germany.  

More recently, he created a wall of 13,000 barrels in Oberhausen in Germany.

Christo paid for "The London Mastaba" on his own. It will stay in place until September 23, when the barrels will be taken down and recycled.

"Not Really Sure How I Feel About It"

Many people walking in the park were surprised to see the artwork.

"It's very modern, but this place is nature and historical. I don't like it here," said Yasmin Koc Ozcengel, who is a tourist from Turkey.

Another person who took a look at the artwork was Anna Andronova. She called "The London Mastaba" very brave. If it weren't as brave, it wouldn't be as stunning, she said.

Sheila Steffenson is an American living in London. She said, "I'm sitting here pondering what in the world does it mean, if it means anything.

"I'm just not really sure how I feel about it," Steffenson said. "Maybe it's a message about pollution. Who knows?"
