Facebook group raises more than $15 million to help reunite immigrant families

SAN FRANCISCO, California — In what is the largest single fundraiser ever on Facebook, a Silicon Valley couple has drummed up millions of dollars from tens of thousands of people to reunite immigrant parents with their children.

Around 400,000 people have contributed over $15 million to a Facebook fundraiser set up four days ago by Charlotte and Dave Willner, far exceeding the campaign's target of $5 million.

Around the time on Monday night when the fundraiser sailed past $3 million, the couple calculated that $4,000 was rolling in every minute. Among those who have donated are Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg.

"It's clearly resonating with a lot of people, and we're just glad we could help," Charlotte Willner told USA TODAY.

Nonprofit Group Offers Free Legal Services

All of the proceeds from the Facebook campaign, "Reunite an immigrant parent with their child," benefit RAICES, a Texas nonprofit that provides free legal services to immigrants and refugees. Facebook, which launched fundraisers in 2017, waived fees last fall for nonprofit fundraisers.

Reached Monday night, Jenny Hixon of RAICES said: "This fundraiser has absolutely blown us away."

"Our fundraising infrastructure is spartan. We have one development person on staff, which is me...and I'm also responsible for overseeing our shelter, volunteer operations, media, community outreach, and refugee resettlement," she said. "We're very much a boots on the ground kind of organization."

RAICES will share its plans for the funds and let people know how they can get involved this week, said Hixon, who is the organization's director of outreach, education and development.

Coordinating With Other Organizations

"We've rapidly reached out to other organizations doing complimentary work in Texas to set up a network to cover all the federal courts, develop a database with all separated families, and a pro bono referral network to ensure representation for every family," she said. "This feels outrageously ambitious, but we kind of feel like this is the moment to do the big things."

The Willners were early Facebook employees who now work at Pinterest and Airbnb. Overwhelmed by reports that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents, Willner set up the fundraiser Saturday morning.

The initial goal was to raise $1,500 to cover the bond fees for one parent so they could retrieve their child from government custody while waiting for court. But then the fundraiser went viral and private donors began matching funds raised.

"Regardless of political party, so many of us are distraught over children being separated from their parents at the border," the Willners said in a statement. "We can't all be on the frontlines to help these families, but by supporting RAICES, we're able to do something that just takes less than a minute, and collectively have an impact."

Separations Result From "Zero Tolerance" Policy

Late last week, the Department of Homeland Security announced that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in a six-week period as part of its "zero tolerance" policy. The Trump administration has been cracking down on adult immigrants who crossed the border illegally by criminally prosecuting them. Children couldn't be held in criminal detention, so they were being separated from their parents.

On Wednesday, June 20 Trump signed an executive order halting the administration's policy of separating children from their parents at the border.

The order does not end the "zero-tolerance" policy that criminally prosecutes adults caught crossing the border illegally. It does keep families together while they are in custody, expedites their cases, and asks the Department of Defense to help house them.

A 7-minute tape obtained by ProPublica, in which children separated from their parents and held at a detention center wail and call for "Mami" or "Papi" fueled the public outcry Monday.

Former first lady Laura Bush and America's other first ladies joined that outcry.

"Mrs. Trump hates to see children separated from their families and hopes both sides of the aisle can finally come together to achieve successful immigration reform," Melania Trump's communications director, Stephanie Grisham, told CNN Sunday. "She believes we need to be a country that follows all laws, but also a country that governs with heart."

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen defended the Trump administration's policy Monday. "We have to do our job. We will not apologize for doing our job," she said. "This administration has a simple message — If you cross the border illegally, we will prosecute you."

Americans Are Divided Over Government Policy

Some of the comments on the Facebook fundraiser were supportive of the administration policy.

"Perhaps it's time for the parents of these innocent children (to) do the right thing by not putting themselves in this situation," wrote one person.

Hixon sees the situation very differently.

"The funding we are receiving will save lives. It will keep people from being deported to unsafe countries," she said. "It speaks to the outrage the cruel policies at the border have provoked. It honestly gives us hope in what has felt like a very dark time."
