Artificial intelligence takes next step in successful debates with humans

SAN FRANCISCO, California – IBM computers famously won at the game show "Jeopardy!" and beat world-class chess masters. Now, they're taking on human debaters.

At a media gathering Monday, June 18, a black IBM computer programmed with artificial intelligence (AI) was able to keep up while debating against people. The computer screen even had a face.

In one debate, IBM's "Project Debater" AI computer made the case in favor of the government paying for space exploration. The debate was against Israeli debate champion Noa Ovadia, who took the opposite position.

Ovadia was judged the winner by the crowd of journalists in "delivering" the argument, as the computer's attempts at humor didn't measure up to the personality of a human. However, IBM outscored Ovadia handily on the question of "knowledge enrichment," or how much people learned.

IBM's computer fared better in a second debate against another person, Dan Zafrir, persuading the crowd that telemedicine, doctors diagnosing and treating patients remotely, is worth pursuing. Again, the human prevailed on delivery, but this time only by a slim margin, and the computer was a big winner in knowledge enrichment. At least nine audience members changed their minds on the topic to the point of view of the computer.

Computer Accesses Information On The IBM Cloud

The debaters, both human and computer, were not made aware of the topics in advance. Each side had four minutes to make an opening statement, followed by a four-minute rebuttal, which is a response to the opponent's statement, and a two-minute closing summary. The computer went first each time.

The event in San Francisco, California, was the first time anyone outside IBM was able to witness a live debate between a human and IBM's AI computer. IBM researchers have been conducting debates in the lab for a while on such topics as "Should income taxes exist?" and "Should antibiotics be used in our food supply?"

Through the IBM Cloud, where information is stored, the computer scanned billions of sentences to generate an organized and persuasive position on the various topics. The machine then listened to its opponent's speech and generated what IBM claims is an unpracticed compelling rebuttal, exhibiting a type of debating that until recently was simply out of reach for the machines.

"We believe that mastering language is a fundamental frontier that AI has to cross," IBM Research Director Arvind Krishna says. "There's aspects like speech recognition, speech to text that AI already does and does quite well. But that is not the same as listening comprehension or constructing a speech that can either be spoken or written." Krishna says computers still need to better understand details to quickly know whether information supports or counters an argument. 

Advances In AI Concern Some Experts

Tech's biggest companies – IBM, Google, Apple, Microsoft and Facebook – are among those engaged in a high stakes race for AI supremacy.

Nevertheless, the possibility of a computer not only convincingly competing in a debate against a person but actually winning the argument is only likely to feed into some people's fears. Tesla and SpaceX leader Elon Musk and the late cosmologist Stephen Hawking worried artificial intelligence could spell doom for human civilization.

Researchers at Massachusetts Institute of Technology played into those fears, using AI to create a psychopathic computer persona named Norman. They named it after the creepy character in Alfred Hitchcock's classic scary movie "Psycho." The researchers wanted to show the potential dangers of using AI.

"I take it in a different way," Krishna says of AI. "The sheer rate and pace of technology today has made a huge amount of information thrown at us from all kinds of sources. Is there something that I trust that can give me both sides of a position? Here are the five pros, well-written, and here are the five cons, well-written. It lets me form my own opinion."

Krishna says the computer debater has made great progress the last couple of years. Two years ago, arguments were unreliable, with the computer making one or two really brilliant statements and five to 10 foolish statements. By the end of last year, the computer began to hold its own, he says.

Computer Loses Points For Its Delivery Style

One key factor is not just the persuasive arguments the machine may make, but how those points are delivered. IBM used a New York actress as the voice of the computer.

"Just like in real debates, humor has to also play a role, not just a well-crafted logical argument," Krishna says. The computer "will never do so well as when the human debater can bring in a personal anecdote or personal experience. It doesn't know how to react to that."

Project Debater's idea of a joke: My blood would boil if I had blood.

So what are possible real-life uses for computers that can debate? Krishna mentions legislators who might be debating critical issues, or lawyers preparing a statement. Students or business executives might also use AI debating to help inform an opinion.

Project Debater earned a fan in expert debater Ovadia. She called some of the computer's thinking skills "really human" and was impressed with how many ideas it could process at the same time. "I'm blown away," she said.
