Fundraiser has raised more than $15 million for separated immigrant families

SAN FRANCISCO, California — Tens of millions of dollars have been raised to reunite immigrant parents with their children. It has become the largest fundraiser ever on the Facebook website.

President Donald Trump's government has been holding immigrants who cross the border into the U.S. without permission. The border separates the U.S. from Mexico. Many of the children are coming from Central American countries, though. This includes countries like Honduras. Because the adult immigrants who enter the country illegally were being taken to jail, their children were being taken to separate facilities. 

Last week, the Department of Homeland Security said that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in six weeks. The department's job is to keep the country safe from any threats. The separations were part of a new plan.

On Wednesday, June 20 President Donald Trump signed a new order. It stops the separation plan from before. It will keep families together while they are being held by the government. They could still be forced to leave, though.

Donations Have Come From 400,000 People

About 400,000 people have given over $15 million to a Facebook fundraiser set up Saturday, June 16, by Charlotte and Dave Willner. It was much more than the fundraiser's goal of $5 million.

At one point, the Willners calculated that $4,000 was coming in every minute. Among those who have donated are Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg.

Charlotte Willner said it clearly matters to many people. "We're just glad we could help."

Texas Group Provides Free Legal Services

The Facebook fundraiser is called "Reunite an immigrant parent with their child." The money from it goes to RAICES. It is a Texas group that provides free assistance to immigrants and refugees when they go to court. 

Jenny Hixon of RAICES said, "This fundraiser has absolutely blown us away."

Hixon said RAICES' ways of fundraising are limited. The group is small so she has to do lots of jobs.

RAICES will share its plans for the money. It will also let people know how they can get involved, said Hixon. 

The group has contacted other groups doing related work in Texas, she said. The plan is to set up records of all separated families and give help to every family, she said. "We kind of feel like this is the moment to do the big things."

Couple's Original Goal Was To Raise $1,500

The Willners used to work at Facebook. Now they work for other technology companies.  Upset by reports that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents, Willner set up the fundraiser Saturday, June 16.

At first, the goal was just to raise $1,500 to cover the costs so one parent could get their child back from the government while waiting to go to court. However, the fundraiser went viral.

The Willners said that many people are upset over children being separated from their parents at the border. "By supporting RAICES, we're able to do something that just takes less than a minute."

A tape was obtained by ProPublica, in which children separated from their parents cry and call for their parents. The recording fueled public outcry. ProPublica is a news organization.

Former first lady Laura Bush and America's other first ladies joined the public outcry.

Stephanie Grisham works for first lady Melania Trump. Grisham talked to CNN on Sunday, June 17. She said Melania "believes we need to be a country that follows all laws, but also a country that governs with heart."

Officials Say They Must Follow The Law

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen defended the Trump government's actions Monday, June 18. "We have to do our job. We will not apologize for doing our job," she said. If someone crosses the border without permission, they will arrest them, she said.  

Not everyone arriving at the border is breaking the law. Some people apply for asylum after they arrive in the United States. Asylum is the permission given to people who are afraid to return to their home country. They wait to see if they will be allowed to stay.

Some people on Facebook supported Trump's plan.

One person wrote that parents should "do the right thing by not putting themselves in this situation."

Hixon sees the situation very differently.

"The funding we are receiving will save lives," she said. It will keep people from being returned to unsafe countries, she said. The money given shows the anger people feel over the cruel laws, she said. "It honestly gives us hope in what has felt like a very dark time."
