Group raises more than $15 million to help separated immigrant parents and children

SAN FRANCISCO, California — Immigrants come from other countries. Sometimes they come looking for work, or to go to school. Sometimes they come because they are not safe in their home countries. There might be war, or maybe someone is trying to hurt them. 

Some immigrants come to the United States. Many of the immigrants have been coming from Central America recently. This includes countries like Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala. President Donald Trump wants to stop immigrants who enter the United States without permission. 

When people who enter the United States without permission have been arrested, they are sent to jail.  Their children are taken away. The children are held in different places. 

Last week the government said nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in six weeks. This was part of a new government plan.

On Wednesday, June 20 Trump signed a new order. It stops the separation plan from before. It will keep families together while they are being held by the government. They will still be held in a camp. And they can still be forced to leave.

Many people were sad to see the children taken from their parents. Some have given money to help these families. They want to help the families get legal help to get their children back. Legal help is very expensive. It is needed to convince the government to help them.

People Give Money To Help Immigrant Families

Nearly half a million people have given over $15 million to a Facebook fundraiser set up Saturday, June 16. It was set up by Charlotte and Dave Willner. The goal was much lower. But people keep donating.

Charlotte Willner said kids are important. Kids being taken away from their parents' matters to many people. They are just glad they could help, she said. 

The money goes to RAICES. It is a Texas group that gives immigrants free help when they go to court. 

Many People Are Upset With Policy

Jenny Hixon works for RAICES. She does many jobs there.

RAICES has talked to other groups in Texas, she said. The plan is to give help to every family, she said. "This is the moment to do the big things," she said.

The Willners said that many people are upset over children being separated from their parents. Not everyone can go there to help, they said. Still, they can help RAICES, they said.

People got more upset after they heard a recording. You could hear children crying for their parents. 

Government Officials Are Doing Their Jobs

Kirstjen Nielsen works for the government. She said, "We have to do our job." If someone comes in without permission, they will take them to court, she said.  

Not everyone who comes in is breaking the law. Some people ask for help after they get to the U.S. They can show that their home country was not safe. They wait to see if they will be allowed to stay. This is called asking for asylum.

Some people on Facebook liked Trump's plan. One person wrote that parents should protect their children by not coming.

Hixon sees it differently.

The money given will save lives, she said. It will keep people from being sent back to unsafe countries, she said.
