By successfully debating humans, artificial intelligence takes a big step

SAN FRANCISCO, California – IBM computers have won at the game show "Jeopardy!" They have beaten world-class chess masters. Now, they're taking on people in debates.

An IBM computer held its own debating people in front of the media on Monday, June 18. A black, IBM computer had been programmed with artificial intelligence (AI), the ability to learn and make decisions similar to humans. The computer even had a face.

In one debate faceoff, IBM's "Project Debater" AI computer made the case in favor of the government paying for space exploration. The debate was against Israeli debate champion Noa Ovadia, who took the opposite position.

Ovadia was judged the winner by the crowd of journalists in "delivering" the argument, as the computer's attempts at humor didn't measure up to the personality of a human. However, IBM outscored Ovadia easily on the question of "knowledge enrichment," or how much people learned.

IBM's computer fared better in a second debate persuading the crowd of the benefits of telemedicine, or doctors diagnosing and treating patients remotely. Dan Zafrir, the human debater, again prevailed on delivery, but this time only by a slim margin, and the computer was a big winner in knowledge enrichment. At least nine audience members changed their minds on the topic to the point of view of the computer.

Computer Had Lots Of Practice Before Big Event

The debaters, both human and computer, were not made aware of the topics in advance. Each side had four minutes to make an opening statement, followed by a four-minute response to the opponent's statement and a two-minute closing summary. The computer went first each time.

The debates happened in San Francisco, California. It was the first time anyone outside IBM could witness a live debate between a human and IBM's AI computer. Yet IBM researchers have been conducting debates in the lab for a while. The debates have been on such topics as "Should income taxes exist?" and "Should antibiotics be used in our food supply?"

Through the IBM Cloud, where information is stored, the computer scans billions of sentences. Then it generates an organized and persuasive position. Next, the machine listens to its opponent's speech and generates what IBM claims is an unpracticed but effective response. This exhibits a type of debating ability that until recently was simply out of reach for the machines.

"We believe that mastering language is a fundamental frontier that AI has to cross," says Arvind Krishna. He is IBM's research director. "There's aspects like speech recognition, speech to text that AI already does and does quite well. But that is not the same as listening comprehension or constructing a speech that can either be spoken or written." Krishna says computers still need to better understand details enough to quickly know whether information supports or goes against an argument. 

Some Experts Are Worried About AI

Companies other than IBM are engaged in a high stakes race for AI supremacy. They include some of the biggest names among technology companies, such as Google, Apple, Microsoft and Facebook. 

The possibility of a computer not only competing in a debate against a person, but actually winning the argument, scares some people. Tesla and SpaceX leader Elon Musk and the late scientist Stephen Hawking have worried about artificial intelligence, saying it could spell doom for human civilization.

Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology played into those fears, using AI to create a crazy computer character named Norman. They named it after the creepy character in Alfred Hitchcock's scary movie "Psycho." The researchers wanted to show the potential risks of programming an AI computer with scary information.

"I take it in a different way," Krishna says of AI. "Is there something that I trust that can give me both sides of a position? ... Here are the five pros, well-written, and here are the five cons, well-written. It lets me form my own opinion."

Computer Continues To Make Progress

Krishna says IBM's computer debater has made great progress the last couple of years. Two years ago, arguments were unreliable, with the computer making one or two really brilliant statements and five to 10 foolish statements. By the end of last year, the computer began to hold its own, he says.

One key factor is not just the persuasive arguments the machine may make, but how those points are delivered. IBM used a New York actress as the voice of the computer.

"Just like in real debates, humor has to also play a role," Krishna says. The computer "will never do so well as when the human debater can bring in a personal anecdote or personal experience. It doesn't know how to react to that."

Project Debater's idea of a joke is saying, "My blood would boil if I had blood."

Computers That Debate Could Help Humans

So what are possible real-life uses for computers that can debate? Krishna mentions legislators who might be debating critical issues, or lawyers preparing a statement. Students or business executives might also use AI debating to help inform an opinion.

Project Debater earned a fan in expert debater Ovadia. She called some of the computer's thinking skills "really human" and was impressed with how many ideas it could process at the same time. "I'm blown away," she said.
