Social media generates more than $15 million to aid separated immigrant families

SAN FRANCISCO, California — A couple has raised millions of dollars from thousands of people to reunite immigrant parents with their children. It has become the largest single fundraiser ever on Facebook.

Around 400,000 people have contributed over $15 million to a Facebook fundraiser set up Saturday, June 16, by Charlotte and Dave Willner. The amount far exceeded the campaign's target of raising $5 million.

Late last week, the Department of Homeland Security announced that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in a six-week period. The department's job is to keep the country safe from any threats. The separations are part of its "zero tolerance" plan. President Donald Trump's administration has been cracking down on adult immigrants who cross the border between the U.S. and Mexico illegally by taking them to court. Children can't be held in jails, so they were being separated from their parents.

On Wednesday, June 20 Trump signed an executive order stopping this policy. 

The order does not end the "zero-tolerance" policy. It does keep families together while they are in custody, expedites their cases and asks the Department of Defense to help house them.

Texas Group Provides Free Legal Services

Around the time on Monday, June 18, when the fundraiser sailed past $3 million, the Willners calculated that $4,000 was rolling in every minute. Among those who have donated are Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg.

"It's clearly resonating with a lot of people, and we're just glad we could help," Charlotte Willner told USA TODAY.

All of the proceeds from the Facebook campaign, "Reunite an immigrant parent with their child," benefit RAICES. It is a Texas nonprofit that provides free legal services to immigrants and refugees. Facebook, which launched fundraisers as a way for people to raise money for different causes in 2017, eliminated fees last fall for nonprofit fundraisers.

Jenny Hixon of RAICES said, "This fundraiser has absolutely blown us away."

Hixon said RAICES' resources for fundraising are limited. "We have one development person on staff, which is me," she said. Hixon added that she is also "responsible for overseeing our shelter, volunteer operations, media, community outreach and refugee resettlement. We're very much a boots-on-the-ground kind of organization."

RAICES will share its plans for the money raised. It will also let people know how they can get involved Wednesday, June 20, said Hixon. She is the organization's director of outreach, education and development.

Groups Are Working Together To Help Immigrants

The group has reached out to other organizations doing related work in Texas, she said. The plan is to set up a network to cover all the federal courts, develop a database with all separated families and a network to give legal help to every family, she said. "We kind of feel like this is the moment to do the big things."

The Willners are former Facebook employees who now work at Pinterest and Airbnb. All three are major technology websites. Overwhelmed by reports that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents, Willner set up the fundraiser Saturday, June 16.

The initial goal was to raise $1,500 to cover the bond fees for one parent so they could get their child back from the government while waiting for court. However, the fundraiser went viral online. Private donors began matching funds raised.

People From Many Backgrounds Oppose Separations

The Willners said in a statement that people of all backgrounds are upset over children being separated from their parents at the border. "We can't all be on the frontlines to help these families, but by supporting RAICES, we're able to do something that just takes less than a minute."

A tape was obtained by ProPublica, in which children separated from their parents and held at a center cry and call for "Mami" (Mommy) or "Papi" (Daddy). The recording fueled public outcry. ProPublica is an investigative journalism organization.

Former first lady Laura Bush and America's other first ladies joined the public outcry.

Melania Trump's communications director, Stephanie Grisham, talked to CNN on Sunday, June 17. "Mrs. Trump hates to see children separated from their families" and hopes political leaders can come together to change how immigration is handled, she said. "She believes we need to be a country that follows all laws, but also a country that governs with heart."

Some Americans Support Strict Enforcement

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen defended the Trump administration's plan Monday, June 18. "We have to do our job. We will not apologize for doing our job," she said. "This administration has a simple message — if you cross the border illegally, we will prosecute," or take them to court. 

Not everyone arriving at the U.S. border is entering illegally, some of them are asking of asylum. This is the legal protection given to people who are afraid to return to their home country. People apply for asylum after they arrive in the United States. They are offered asylum if they would be put in danger by being sent back to their home countries.

Some of the comments on the Facebook fundraiser were supportive of Trump's plan.

"Perhaps it's time for the parents of these innocent children (to) do the right thing by not putting themselves in this situation," wrote one person.

Hixon sees the situation very differently.

"The funding we are receiving will save lives. It will keep people from being deported to unsafe countries," she said. The donations show the outrage people feel over the cruel border rules, she said. "It honestly gives us hope in what has felt like a very dark time."
