Computers take a big step forward by being able to debate humans

SAN FRANCISCO, California – IBM computers have shown they can beat people at the game show "Jeopardy!" and beat the best chess players in the world. Now, they're taking on people in debates.

A debate is when people argue their side of an issue. In front of reporters on Monday, June 18, an IBM computer tried to prove it could present its ideas better than a person could. It didn't win, but it did quite well. 

The black, IBM computer has been programmed with artificial intelligence (AI), meaning it can learn and make decisions similar to humans. The computer even had a face.

"Project Debater" Faced Two Experts

In one debate faceoff, IBM's "Project Debater" AI computer argued that government should pay to explore space. The debate was against Israeli debate champion Noa Ovadia. She said government shouldn't pay for it. 

Ovadia was judged the winner by the crowd of journalists in "delivering" her ideas. The computer's attempts at humor didn't measure up to a human. Still, IBM outscored Ovadia easily on "knowledge enrichment," or how much people learned.

IBM's computer did better in a second debate. It persuaded the crowd of the benefits of telemedicine. This kind of medicine is when doctors help patients from a distance. They might use the Internet. Dan Zafrir, the human debater, again won based on how he spoke. Only by a little though. At least nine audience members changed their minds to agree with the computer about telemedicine.

The Computer Finds Information On The Cloud

The debaters, both human and computer, didn't know the topics in advance. Each side had four minutes to make an opening statement, followed by a four-minute response to the opponent's statement. The debaters finished with a two-minute closing statement.

The debates happened in San Francisco, California. It was the first time anyone outside IBM watched a debate between a person and IBM's AI computer. 

Through the IBM Cloud, where information is stored, the computer reads billions of sentences. Then it creates an organized and persuasive statement. Next, the machine listens to its opponent's speech and creates what IBM says is an unpracticed but effective response. This exhibits a type of debating skill that machines could not do until recently.

The Computer Still Has Trouble With Language

Arvind Krishna is a leader at IBM who studies what computers can do. Krishna says computers are not yet experts at language. They can  recognize speech and turn it into words. Still, he knows that's different than understanding what a person means. The computers need to quickly know if detailed information argues for or against a position. 

Companies other than IBM are involved in the race for AI supremacy. They include the biggest technology companies like Google, Apple and Facebook. 

Krishna says the computer debater has improved the last two years. Before, its arguments were unreliable, with the computer making one or two brilliant statements and five to 10 foolish statements. By the end of last year, though, the computer began to hold its own, he says.

"Is there something that I trust that can give me both sides of a position?" Krishna says computers can offer people balanced information. "It lets me form my own opinion."

Debating is not just the facts a computer can provide, though. One important part is how ideas are stated. IBM used a female actor as the computer's voice.

"Just like in real debates, humor has to also play a role," Krishna says. Project Debater's idea of a joke is saying, "My blood would boil if I had blood."

AI Could Help Humans Perform Different Tasks

The computer also can't match how people tell stories about what happened to them in real life.

So what are the possible real-life uses for computers that can debate? Krishna mentions lawmakers who might be deciding on important laws, or lawyers preparing statements. Students or business leaders might also use AI debating to help create an opinion.

Project Debater did earn a fan in expert debater Ovadia. She called the computer's thinking skills "really human." Ovadia was also impressed with how many ideas it handled at once. "I'm blown away," she said.
