Fundraiser to aid separated immigrant families tops $15 million in less than a week

SAN FRANCISCO, California — In the largest single fundraiser ever on Facebook, a couple has drummed up millions of dollars from tens of thousands of people to reunite immigrant parents with their children.

Around half a million people have contributed over $15 million to a Facebook fundraiser set up Saturday, June 16, by Charlotte and Dave Willner, far exceeding the campaign's target of $5 million.

Around the time on Monday, June 18, when the fundraiser sailed past $3 million, the couple calculated that $4,000 was rolling in every minute. Among those who have donated are Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg.

"It's clearly resonating with a lot of people, and we're just glad we could help," Charlotte Willner told USA TODAY.

Group Provides Free Legal Services To Immigrants

All of the proceeds from the Facebook campaign, "Reunite an immigrant parent with their child," benefit RAICES, a Texas nonprofit that provides free legal services to immigrants and refugees. Facebook, which launched fundraisers in 2017, waived fees last fall for nonprofit fundraisers.

Jenny Hixon of RAICES said on Monday, June 18, "This fundraiser has absolutely blown us away."

"Our fundraising infrastructure is spartan. We have one development person on staff, which is me," she said. Hixon added that she is also "responsible for overseeing our shelter, volunteer operations, media, community outreach and refugee resettlement. We're very much a boots-on-the-ground kind of organization."

RAICES will share its plans for the funds and let people know how they can get involved Wednesday, June 20, said Hixon. She is the organization's director of outreach, education and development.

"We've rapidly reached out to other organizations doing complimentary work in Texas to set up a network to cover all the federal courts, develop a database with all separated families," and a network to give legal help to every family, she said. "This feels outrageously ambitious, but we kind of feel like this is the moment to do the big things."

Couple's Original Goal Was Just $1,500

The Willners are former Facebook employees who now work at Pinterest and Airbnb. Overwhelmed by reports that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents, Willner set up the fundraiser Saturday, June 16.

The initial goal was to raise $1,500 to cover the bond fees for one parent so they could retrieve their child from government custody while waiting for court. However, the fundraiser went viral and private donors began matching funds raised.

"Regardless of political party, so many of us are distraught over children being separated from their parents at the border," the Willners said in a statement. Both Republicans and Democrats have frequently disagreed about what to do about undocumented immigrants. "We can't all be on the frontlines to help these families, but by supporting RAICES, we're able to do something that just takes less than a minute and collectively have an impact," the Willners said.

Separations Result From "Zero Tolerance" Policy

Late last week, the Department of Homeland Security announced that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in a six-week period as part of its "zero tolerance" plan. President Donald Trump's administration has been cracking down on adult immigrants who cross the border between the U.S. and Mexico illegally by criminally prosecuting them. Children couldn't be held in criminal detention, so they were being separated from their parents.

On Wednesday, June 20 Trump signed an executive order stopping the administration's policy of separating children from their parents at the border.

The order does not end the "zero-tolerance" policy that criminally prosecutes adults for crossing the border illegally. It does keep families together while they are in custody, expedites their cases and asks the Department of Defense to help house them.

A 7-minute tape obtained by ProPublica, in which children separated from their parents and held at a detention center wail and call for "Mami" (Mommy) or "Papi" (Daddy) fueled the public outcry. ProPublica is an investigative journalism organization.

Former first lady Laura Bush and America's other first ladies joined that outcry.

Melania Trump's communications director, Stephanie Grisham, talked to CNN on Sunday, June 17. "Mrs. Trump hates to see children separated from their families and hopes both sides of the aisle can finally come together to achieve successful immigration reform," she said. "She believes we need to be a country that follows all laws, but also a country that governs with heart."

Some Americans Support The Separation Policy

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen defended the Trump administration's plan Monday. "We have to do our job. We will not apologize for doing our job," she said. "This administration has a simple message — if you cross the border illegally, we will prosecute you."

Some of the comments on the Facebook fundraiser were supportive of Trump's plan.

"Perhaps it's time for the parents of these innocent children (to) do the right thing by not putting themselves in this situation," wrote one person.

Hixon sees the situation very differently.

"The funding we are receiving will save lives. It will keep people from being deported to unsafe countries," she said. "It speaks to the outrage the cruel policies at the border have provoked. It honestly gives us hope in what has felt like a very dark time."
