Fifth-grader lands first acting job in "Incredibles 2"

Huck Milner is 10 years old. He was not even alive when "The Incredibles" came out. That was back in 2004. Now, Huck is starring in its sequel. The new movie is called "Incredibles 2."

Huck plays the voice of Dash Parr. Dash is part of a family of superheroes. His father is Mr. Incredible. His mother is Elastigirl. Everyone in the family has special powers. Dash's power is super speed.

Huck goes to school in New York City. He will be in the sixth grade this fall. Huck has a lot in common with Dash. They both have two siblings. They also have shortened names. Dash is short for Dashiell. Huck is short for Huckleberry.

Big Fan

Huck is a big fan of the first "Incredibles." He has loved it since he was little. It is one of his favorite movies.

Huck was lucky. The filmmakers behind "The Incredibles" were looking for a new actor. The one who played Dash in the first movie is now in his 20s. His voice has changed. He no longer sounds like a 10-year-old. Huck went to a tryout for the part. Then he met with the movie's director. Later, he got some great news.

"I got the call that I had gotten the part," he said. "I thought it was an April Fool's joke."

Not Easy

Working on the movie was not easy. Huck had to practice repeating his lines. He had to say them over and over.

The hard work paid off, Huck said. He believes the movie is not just about superheroes. Rather, it is about family.

All kinds of kids will enjoy the movie, he said. "I know they will like it!"

More About Huck

Favorite book: The "HiLo" series by Judd Winick. "My favorite types of books are graphic novels, and my favorite book is 'HiLo,' and it is about a boy who comes to Earth."

Favorite superhero: Huck likes superheroes who are fast. Speed helps you "do so many things," he said. One of his favorite superheroes is Flash. Another is Quicksilver.

Favorite scene in his movie: "It is the scene where I press all the buttons. I press the buttons in our new house, and the couch falls in the water. So funny."
