First time's the charm: Fifth-grader cast in "Incredibles 2"

Huck Milner wasn't even alive when the movie "The Incredibles" came out in 2004. Now, he's one of the stars of its sequel, "Incredibles 2."

The 10-year-old New Yorker plays the voice of Dash Parr, the middle child of superhero parents Mr. Incredible and Elastigirl. Like everyone in Dash's family, he has special powers. His is super speed.

Huck just finished the fifth grade at a public school in New York City. He has a lot in common with Dash. Both have two siblings and a shortened name (Dash is a nickname for Dashiell and Huck is short for Huckleberry). They also share a love of speed.

Power Of Speed

"I'd love the power of speed, because I'd be able to beat my cousins or beat my sisters at something. And I would be able to go anywhere I want really quickly," the actor said.

Huck has loved the original "Incredibles" since he was little.

"My parents watched 'The Incredibles' with me when I was 5," he said. "Since then it has always been one of my favorite movies."

Not A Prank

Luckily for Huck, the filmmakers were looking for a new voice actor to play Dash. The original is now in his 20s and no longer sounds like a 10-year-old. Back in fourth grade, Huck did the first audition. Then he got a call for a meeting with the movie's director, Brad Bird. Later, Huck received news so good he thought it was a prank.

"I got the call that I had gotten the part, and I thought it was an April Fool's joke," Huck recalled. "I really thought it was a joke."

The young actor had been in several musicals and plays through a New York children's acting academy. But he had never landed a professional job before. Huck's role in the high-profile Disney movie is his first.

Working on an animated movie isn't like a live-action movie, Huck explained. He recorded his voice alone in a studio with the director and sound professionals. He didn't even meet his fellow cast members until they came together to promote the movie.

"You go into a room, and Brad Bird does all the other voices, and you do your part," Huck explained. "After that, they piece it all together with the other actors' voices and your part. After piecing it all together, you get the whole film."

Being An Actor Means Practicing Lines

Huck said being a voice actor means practicing repeating a line again and again.

"When I'd do my voice, the director would stop and say, 'Do it a little more like this,' and then I'd do it like that. I was basically a parrot."

The hard work paid off, Huck said. He believes the movie isn't just about individual superheroes, but what it means to belong to a family. That makes the 'Incredibles' movies a lot different from other superhero movies.

The sequel will appeal to even middle-schoolers who don't usually watch animated movies, Huck said. "Whether they pretend not to like it, I know they will like it!"

More About Huck

Siblings: Two older sisters, ages 13 and 15.

Pets: "Our dog died a couple of years ago, so now we have fish": Joe Fish, Clowny and Angel Fish.

Hobbies: "I like singing. I like theater. I like playing hockey."

Favorite book: The "HiLo" series by Judd Winick. "My favorite types of books are graphic novels, and my favorite book is 'HiLo,' and it's about a boy who comes to Earth."

Favorite superhero: "I like all superheroes with the power of speed. Because if you have the power of speed, you can do so many things. I like Dash, but I also like the Flash and Quicksilver."

Favorite scene in his movie: "It's the scene where I press all the buttons. I don't actually talk a lot in that scene, but I press the buttons in our new house, and the couch falls in the water, and then I crush the couch and all the water features. So funny."
