Fifth-grade superhero's first acting job is in "Incredibles 2"

Huck Milner was not even alive when "The Incredibles" came out in 2004. Now, he is one of the stars of its sequel. The new movie is called "Incredibles 2."

Huck is 10 years old. In the movie, he plays the voice of Dash Parr. Dash is the child of superhero parents Mr. Incredible and Elastigirl. Like everyone in Dash's family, he has special powers. His special power is super speed.

Huck goes to school in New York City. He just finished fifth grade. Huck has a lot in common with Dash. Both have two siblings and a shortened name. Dash is a nickname for Dashiell and Huck is short for Huckleberry. The two also share a love of speed.

A Favorite Movie

Huck has loved the original "Incredibles" since he was little. He says it is one of his favorite movies.

Huck was lucky. The filmmakers behind "The Incredibles" were looking for a new voice actor. The original actor who played Dash is now in his 20s. He no longer sounds like a 10-year-old. Back in fourth grade, Huck went to a tryout. Then he got a call to meet with the movie's director, Brad Bird. Later, Huck received some great news.

"I got the call that I had gotten the part," he said. "I thought it was an April Fool's joke."

Working on an animated movie is different, Huck said. It is not like a live-action movie. Huck recorded his voice alone in a studio. He did not meet his fellow cast members until later.

Repeating His Lines

Huck said he had to practice repeating his lines. He had to get used to saying them over and over.

The hard work paid off, Huck said. He believes the movie is not just about superheroes. Rather, it is about what it means to belong to a family.

The movie will appeal to all kinds of kids, Huck said. "I know they will like it!"

More About Huck

Favorite book: The "HiLo" series by Judd Winick. "My favorite types of books are graphic novels, and my favorite book is 'HiLo,' and it's about a boy who comes to Earth."

Favorite superhero: "I like all superheroes with the power of speed. Because if you have the power of speed, you can do so many things. I like Dash, but I also like the Flash and Quicksilver."

Favorite scene in his movie: "It's the scene where I press all the buttons. I don't actually talk a lot in that scene, but I press the buttons in our new house, and the couch falls in the water. So funny."
