Taken by surprise: Fifth-grader's first acting job is in "Incredibles 2"

Huck Milner was not even alive when "The Incredibles" came out in 2004. Now, he is one of the stars of its sequel, "Incredibles 2."

The 10-year-old New Yorker plays the voice of Dash Parr. Dash is the middle child of superhero parents Mr. Incredible and Elastigirl. Like everyone in Dash's family, he has special powers. His special power is super speed.

Love Of Speed

Huck just finished the fifth grade at a public school in New York City. He has a lot in common with Dash. Both have two siblings and a shortened name. Dash is a nickname for Dashiell and Huck is short for Huckleberry. The two also share a love of speed.

"I'd love the power of speed," the young actor said. "I would be able to go anywhere I want really quickly."

Huck has loved the original "Incredibles" since he was little.

"My parents watched 'The Incredibles' with me when I was 5," he said. "Since then it has always been one of my favorite movies."

Luckily for Huck, the filmmakers were looking for a new voice actor to play Dash. The original actor is now in his 20s. He no longer sounds like a 10-year-old. Back in fourth grade, Huck did the first audition. Then he got a call. They asked him to come in for a meeting with the movie's director, Brad Bird. Later, Huck received news so good he thought it was a prank.

Not An April Fool's Joke

"I got the call that I had gotten the part, and I thought it was an April Fool's joke," Huck recalled. "I really thought it was a joke."

The young actor had been in several children's musicals and plays in New York. But he had never landed a professional job before. Huck's role in the new Disney movie is his first.

Working on an animated movie is not like a live-action movie, Huck explained. He recorded his voice alone in a studio with the director. He did not even meet his fellow cast members until later. They met when it came time to promote the movie.

Huck said he had to practice repeating his lines again and again.

"When I'd do my voice, the director would stop and say, 'Do it a little more like this,' and then I'd do it like that. I was basically a parrot."

Hard Work Paid Off

The hard work paid off, Huck said. He believes the movie is not just about individual superheroes. Rather, it is about what it means to belong to a family. That makes the 'Incredibles' movies a lot different from other superhero movies.

The sequel will even appeal to middle-schoolers who do not usually watch animated movies, Huck said. "I know they will like it!"

More About Huck

Siblings: Two older sisters, ages 13 and 15.

Pets: "Our dog died a couple of years ago, so now we have fish": Joe Fish, Clowny and Angel Fish.

Hobbies: "I like singing. I like theater. I like playing hockey."

Favorite book: The "HiLo" series by Judd Winick. "My favorite types of books are graphic novels, and my favorite book is 'HiLo,' and it's about a boy who comes to Earth."

Favorite superhero: "I like all superheroes with the power of speed. Because if you have the power of speed, you can do so many things. I like Dash, but I also like the Flash and Quicksilver."

Favorite scene in his movie: "It's the scene where I press all the buttons. I don't actually talk a lot in that scene, but I press the buttons in our new house, and the couch falls in the water, and then I crush the couch. So funny."
