"Black Panther" star gives his "best hero" award to real-life hero

SANTA MONICA, California — A superhero on the film screen decided it was more important to "acknowledge the heroes we have in real life."

At the MTV Movie and TV Awards, "Black Panther" film star Chadwick Boseman was given the award for "best hero." He instead passed his trophy to James Shaw Jr. 

"Black Panther" Actor Donates Best Hero Award

Shaw wrestled a gun away from a gunman in a Tennessee Waffle House restaurant in April. "This is going to live at your house," Boseman told Shaw, giving him the event's golden popcorn award.

The "best hero" award was one of four for "Black Panther," the blockbuster Marvel comic-book movie. It took home its first movie trophies since coming out in the theater. 

Boseman, who starred as T'Challa in "Black Panther," also won the award for best performance in a movie. Michael B. Jordan, who played the villain Erik Killmonger in the movie, won best villain.

Top TV Show Wins Four Awards

"Stranger Things" was the top television honoree. It won four awards, including a win for best show for the second year in a row.

The awards were handed out Saturday, June 16, and were broadcast on TV Monday night, June 18.

The show is known for bringing fresh, new talent to light. It also gives out awards for more quirky, untraditional categories like best kiss and most frightened performance. 

Actress Tiffany Haddish was the host. She donned a variety of costumes throughout the show. The clothes were references to classic film and TV roles, such as Holly Golightly from the 1961 film "Breakfast at Tiffany's" and Starlet from 1970s TV comedy "The Carol Burnett Show."

First African-American Film To Earn More Than $1 Billion

Haddish kicked off the show with a "Black Panther" skit, hinting toward the film's big night. She noted in her opening solo speech that it is the first African-American film to earn more than $1 billion at the box office. Throughout the night, Haddish also poked fun at other hit films such as "Star Wars: The Last Jedi" and "A Quiet Place."

"Black Panther" is about the king and righteous superhero of the technologically advanced nation of Wakanda. It broke barriers earlier this year as the first Marvel comic-book film to feature a black lead actor. Its massive popularity overshadowed competing films like "Wonder Woman" and "Avengers: Infinity War."

Haddish noted that she is the first black woman to host the awards show, which is in its 27th year. She also took home a trophy for her breakthrough role in the movie "Girls Trip." 

The gay teen comedy film "Love, Simon" won for best kiss for a scene between Nick Robinson and Keiynan Lonsdale.

Encouraging LGBTQ Youth

While Robinson wasn't there to accept the award, Lonsdale gave some encouraging words to LGBTQ youth.

"I just want to say to every kid," he said. "You can live your dreams and kiss the one that you love no matter what gender."

In addition to winning best show, the kids of "Stranger Things" also won awards for most frightened performance, best musical moment and best performance for Millie Bobby Brown. The actress, who plays Eleven in the series, couldn't make the event because of a broken kneecap. Brown accepted the award for best performance on video stream.

Meanwhile, Madelaine Petsch won "best scene stealer" for her role as Cheryl Blossom in "Riverdale." Gal Gadot won for best fight scene as Wonder Woman and the young cast of "It" won for best on-screen team.

"Gaga: Five Foot Two" won the award for best documentary. The Netflix feature followed Lady Gaga during the production of her fifth studio album, "Joanne."

Activism And "Honest Art"

Rapper Common presented actress and writer Lena Waithe with the trailblazer award for her activism and "deeply honest art."

During her acceptance speech, Waithe paid tribute to "Paris is Burning," the 1990 documentary film. It was about the drag scene in New York during the late 1980s. Drag queens are men, typically gay men, who dress like women for the purpose of entertainment. 

She called those in "Paris is Burning," many who aren't alive anymore, "the bravest human beings that ever lived."

"I'm doing what we as a society should have done a long time ago and give them the glory and shine that they deserve," she said.

Mix Of Humor And Religious Messages

Actor Chris Pratt mixed humor and religious messages while accepting the show's generation award, which honored his roles in many popular shows and films. He told the crowd to "breathe. If you don't, you'll suffocate."

He also urged fans to "learn to pray" and accept that they are imperfect.

The show also featured musical performances by Nick Jonas and Mustard, as well as rising stars Chloe x Halle, who count Beyoncé as a mentor.
