"Black Panther" hero honors Tennessee hero at MTV Awards

SANTA MONICA, California — The action film "Black Panther" was one of the biggest winners at the MTV Movie and TV Awards last weekend.

The event was broadcast on TV June 18. In it, "Black Panther" took home four awards. Two of them went to its star, Chadwick Boseman.

Acknowledging Real-Life Heroes

When accepting his award for "best hero," Boseman did something different. He said it was more important to "acknowledge the heroes we have in real life."

Boseman handed his trophy to James Shaw Jr. In April Shaw saved the lives of others in a Tennessee restaurant. He got a gun away from a gunman.

"This is going to live at your house," Boseman told Shaw. He gave Shaw the show's golden popcorn award.

Boseman, who starred as T'Challa in "Black Panther," also won the award for best performance in a movie. Michael B. Jordan, who played the villain Erik Killmonger, won best villain.

Best Show For Second Year In A Row

"Stranger Things" won four awards, the most of any TV show. It was named best show for the second year in a row.

The award show is known for giving out awards for more unusual categories. Actors and actresses can win "best kiss" and "most frightened performance" trophies. 

Actress Tiffany Haddish was the host. She began the show with a "Black Panther" skit. Haddish noted in her opening solo speech that it is the first film with mostly African-American actors to earn more than $1 billion in theaters. 

Throughout the night, Haddish also poked fun at other hit films including "Star Wars: The Last Jedi" and "A Quiet Place."

"Black Panther" is about the king and noble superhero of Wakanda, a technologically advanced nation. The film was the first Marvel comic-book film to feature a black lead actor. Its huge popularity overshadowed other films based on comic books, like "Wonder Woman" and "Avengers: Infinity War."

Host Wins Trophy for Breakthrough Role

Haddish noted that she is the first black woman to host the awards show, which is in its 27th year. She also took home a trophy for her breakthrough role in the movie "Girls Trip." 

The gay teen comedy film "Love, Simon" won for best kiss. In the winning scene, Nick Robinson kisses another boy, Keiynan Lonsdale.

Support For LGBTQ Youth

In accepting the award, Lonsdale gave some encouraging words to LGBTQ youth.

"I just want to say to every kid," he said. "You can live your dreams and kiss the one that you love no matter what gender."

The kids of "Stranger Things" also won awards for most frightened performance and best musical moment. Lead actress Millie Bobby Brown also won best performance. The actress, who plays Eleven in the series, couldn't make the event because of a broken kneecap. Brown accepted the award through a video stream.

Meanwhile, Madelaine Petsch won "best scene stealer" for her role as Cheryl Blossom in "Riverdale." Gal Gadot won for best fight as Wonder Woman. 

"Gaga: Five Foot Two" won the award for best documentary. It followed Lady Gaga's everyday life during the production of her latest album, "Joanne."

Rapper Common presented Lena Waithe with the trailblazer award. She was recognized for her activism, writing and "deeply honest art."

1990 Documentary Film Honored

During a speech, Waithe paid tribute to "Paris is Burning," the 1990 documentary film. It was about the drag scene in New York during the late 1980s. Drag queens are men, typically gay men, who dress like women for entertainment. 

Many of the people from "Paris is Burning" aren't alive anymore. Waithe called them "the bravest human beings that ever lived."

"I'm doing what we as a society should have done a long time ago and give them the glory and shine that they deserve," she said.

Actor Chris Pratt won the show's generation award, for having performed in many popular films and shows. He told fans to "learn to pray" and accept that they aren't perfect.

The show also featured musical performances by Nick Jonas and rising stars Chloe x Halle.
