At MTV Awards, "Black Panther" movie hero honors real-life hero

SANTA MONICA, California — The MTV Movie and TV Awards were shown on TV Monday, June 18.  

At the event, the movie "Black Panther" won four awards. Two of them went to its star, Chadwick Boseman.

"Black Panther" Actor Gives Award to Real-Life Hero

One of his awards was for "best hero." Boseman gave a speech after winning. He said it was more important to "acknowledge the heroes we have in real life."

Boseman handed his trophy to James Shaw Jr. 

In April, Shaw was at a restaurant in Tennessee. A gunman came into the restaurant. Shaw got the gun away from him.

Boseman gave Shaw the show's golden popcorn award. "This is going to live at your house," he told Shaw. 

In "Black Panther," Boseman starred as T'Challa. He also won the award for best performance in a movie. 

"Stranger Things" Big Winner

"Stranger Things" won the most awards of any TV show. It got four trophies. It was named best show for the second year in a row.

Actress Tiffany Haddish was the host. She made a speech in the beginning. She noted that "Black Panther" earned more than $1 billion. It is the first film with mostly African-American actors to do this.

In Black Panther, T'Challa is king of the country Wakanda. It is a technologically advanced nation in Africa. 

First Black Woman To Host MTV Awards Show

Haddish was the first black woman to host the awards show. 

The comedy film "Love, Simon" won for best kiss. In the scene, Nick Robinson kisses another boy, Keiynan Lonsdale.

In a speech, Lonsdale encouraged LGBTQ youth.

"You can live your dreams and kiss the one that you love," he said. 

The kids of "Stranger Things" won several awards. Millie Bobby Brown won "best performance." The actress plays the character Eleven in the show. 

Meanwhile, Gal Gadot won for best fight scene as Wonder Woman. 

Lena Waithe took home the trailblazer award. She was honored for her writing and "deeply honest art."

During a speech, Waithe paid tribute to "Paris is Burning." It was a 1990 documentary film. It followed New York drag queens during the 1980s. Drag queens are men, usually gay men. They dress like women for entertainment. 

Should Have Been Honored A Long Time Ago

Waithe called them brave. She said they should have been honored a long time ago.

Actor Chris Pratt won the generation award. He got it for his many performances in popular films and shows. 

He also urged fans to "learn to pray." He said they should accept that they are not perfect.

Musicians Nick Jonas and Chloe x Halle also performed at the show.
