Instagram's video rules are changing to attract more young users

SAN FRANCISCO, California — Facebook and Instagram are working to keep young people interested in their social media sites. 

Facebook, which runs Instagram, is relaxing the rules of the Instagram video service. The changes are an attempt to pull younger viewers away from YouTube. Instagram wants to give them more to watch on their smartphones.

An expansion was announced June 20. It will increase Instagram's video time limit from one minute to 10 minutes for most people posting videos. Accounts with large audiences will be able to go as long as one hour.

Video will be available through Instagram or a new app called IGTV. It stands for Instagram TV. The video will later give Facebook more opportunities to sell ads.

Keeping With The Cool Kids

It's the most recent time Instagram has borrowed from a competitor's practices. It copies ideas to try to stay a cool place for young people to share and view content. Now Instagram is copying YouTube. Facebook and Instagram had already copied Snapchat, another magnet for teens and young adults.

Instagram is now nearly 8 years old. It is moving further from its start as a photo-sharing service as it dives into longer videos.

The changes come as Facebook struggles to attract teens. It is also dealing with other problems. People discovered that it was not doing a good job protecting user information.

Teens Are Particular With Their Viewing

Kevin Systrom is the leader of Instagram. He said that he hopes IGTV will become a center for new performers. They can become famous, with followings among teens and young adults, he said.

That is already happening on YouTube. It has become the world's most popular place for videos since Google bought it nearly 12 years ago. YouTube now has 1.8 billion users.

Facebook bought Instagram six years ago. Instagram now has 1 billion users, up from 800 million nine months ago.

What's important is how many teenagers use the service. Just over 7 in 10 U.S. teens from 13 to 17 years old use Instagram, the Pew Research Center said. YouTube has even more users. Almost 9 in 10 teens use it. Only about half of people in that group now use Facebook, a decrease from a similar Pew survey in 2014-15.

Who Can Make the Most Money?

That trend appears to be behind the changes. It seems to be one of the reasons that Facebook is opening Instagram to the longer videos usually found on YouTube, said Paul Verna. He works for the company eMarketer.

Besides giving Instagram a way to attract young people, longer videos are better suited for video ads. Instagram does not allow video ads now, but Systrom said it will later. They will make money for Instagram. When the ads begin, Instagram intends to share the money from them with the videos' creators. YouTube already shares ad money with YouTube stars.

"We want to make sure they make a living because that is the only way it works in the long run," Systrom said.

The ads also will help Facebook earn more money. Total spending on online video ads in the United States is expected to rise. It is predicted to jump by $9 million by 2021, eMarketer said.

The Vertical-Video Wave

Lele Pons is a YouTube star who also has gained 25 million followers on Instagram. She plans to launch a new cooking show on IGTV in hopes of increasing her audience and earning more money. "It's like Coca-Cola and Pepsi," she said. "You will never know what you like better unless you try both."

IGTV will use only vertical video. It is designed to fill the entire screen of smartphones. Phones appear to be becoming the main way younger people watch videos. By contrast, most YouTube videos fill only a part of the screen unless the phone is turned horizontally.

Snapchat began using vertical video before Instagram. It is another example of Instagram's interest in copying rivals.

However, Systrom sees it differently. "This is acknowledging vertical video is the future and we want the future to come more quickly, so we built IGTV."
