Changes are underway at Instagram as it sets its sights on YouTubers

SAN FRANCISCO, California — Instagram is going through some changes to enable it to keep up with the competition. 

Facebook, the parent company of Instagram, is relaxing the rules of its Instagram video service. The changes are an attempt to lure younger viewers away from YouTube when they are looking for something to watch on their smartphones.

Instagram's video time limit will increase from one minute to 10 minutes for most users, the company's June 20 expansion announcement said. Accounts with large audiences will be able to go as long as an hour.

Video will be available through Instagram or a new app called IGTV or Instagram TV. The video will eventually give Facebook more opportunities to sell advertising.

Companies Boldly Copy One Another

It is the latest instance in which Instagram has taken a page from a rival's playbook in an effort to preserve its standing as a cool place for young people to share and view content. In this case, Instagram is mimicking Google's YouTube. Facebook and Instagram have already copied Snapchat — another magnet for teens and young adults.

Instagram is now nearly 8 years old. It is moving further from its roots as a photo-sharing service as it dives into longer-form video.

The changes come as Facebook struggles to attract teens. It is also dealing with a scandal that exposed its leaky controls for protecting users' personal information.

Kevin Systrom is the CEO of Instagram. He told The Associated Press that he hopes IGTV will emerge as a hub of creativity for unknown performers. They can become Internet sensations with eager followings among teens and young adults, he said.

Money Talks, Users Watch

That is what's already happening on YouTube, which has become the world's most popular video outlet since Google bought it for $1.76 billion nearly 12 years ago. YouTube now has 1.8 billion users.

Facebook bought Instagram for $1 billion six years ago. Instagram now has 1 billion users, up from 800 million nine months ago.

More importantly, 72 percent of U.S. teens ranging from 13 to 17 years old use Instagram, according to the Pew Research Center. YouTube leads at 85 percent. Only 51 percent of people in that group now use Facebook. That is a decrease from 71 percent from a similar Pew survey in 2014-15.

That trend appears to be behind the changes. It seems to be one of the reasons that Facebook is opening Instagram to the longer videos typically found on YouTube, said Paul Verna of the research company eMarketer.

Besides giving Instagram another potential drawing card, longer videos are better suited for video ads lasting from 30 seconds to one minute. Instagram does not currently allow video ads, but Systrom said it eventually will. When the ads come, Instagram intends to share the money from them with the videos' creators. YouTube already shares ad money with YouTube stars.

"We want to make sure they make a living because that is the only way it works in the long run," Systrom said.

Online Ad Spending Is Steadily Rising

The ads also will help Facebook to continue its income growth. Total spending on online video ads in the United States is expected to rise. It's predicted to go from nearly $18 billion this year to $27 billion in 2021, according to eMarketer.

Lele Pons, a YouTube sensation who also has gained 25 million followers on Instagram, plans to launch a new cooking show on IGTV in hopes of increasing her audience and eventually generating more income. "It's like Coca-Cola and Pepsi," she said. "You will never know what you like better unless you try both."

People Want Vertical Video

IGTV's programming format will consist exclusively of vertical video designed to fill the entire screen of smartphones. Phones are becoming the main way younger people watch videos. By contrast, most YouTube videos fill only a portion of the screen unless the phone is tilted horizontally.

Snapchat began featuring vertical video before Instagram. It is another example of Instagram's interest in copying rivals.

However, Systrom sees it differently. "This is acknowledging vertical video is the future and we want the future to come more quickly, so we built IGTV."
