Boxes from around the country arrive at Texas asylum-seeker center

Stacks of Amazon boxes started appearing at an immigrant shelter in McAllen, Texas, around Father's Day. 

McAllen borders Mexico, and many immigrants are being held in the city. Some of them end up at a respite center run by Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley. It cares for immigrants as they sort out their futures. 

The surge of boxes that were delivered contained shirts, pants, underwear and many other items.

The boxes started arriving as people across the country began to learn about President Donald Trump's new "zero-tolerance" immigration policy. 

"Zero-Tolerance" Plan Prompts Protests
In mid-June, the Department of Homeland Security announced that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in a six-week period. The department's job is to keep the country safe from any threats. The separations are part of its "zero-tolerance" plan. The Trump administration has been cracking down on adult immigrants who illegally cross the border between the United States and Mexico by taking them to court. Children cannot be held in jails, so they were being separated from their parents. Many parents did not know where their children were taken.

People around the country began protesting. On June 20, Trump signed an executive order that he said stopped this policy. 

The order does not totally end the "zero-tolerance" policy. It does keep families together while they are in custody, though.

Strangers Offer Support
Included in the Amazon packages were notes of support. One read, "As someone who has a dad who would do anything for their child I hope this helps a few of the dads that come through your doors with the same ideas."

"All of the sudden they started getting like a thousand boxes a day and then more and then more. And they had to come and secure space here and that filled up and they got another space and that filled up," said Natalie Montelongo. She is a native of nearby Brownsville who flew in from Washington, D.C., to volunteer at the center. She set up an Amazon wish list with items needed by the shelter and posted the link on social media.

The immigrant respite center has received so many boxes that it had to rent additional storage space.

"I feel like each one of these boxes represents one person that wishes they were here and is following the issue and that cares," said Montelongo. She is a national campaign strategist for the American Civil Liberties Union group. It is a civil rights group.

Donations also came the old-fashioned way, too. Local residents stopped by and dropped off what they could, and groups of volunteers from around the country drove together to McAllen, in Texas' Rio Grande Valley, offering donations and cash.

Former Immigrants Understand The Hardships
Every day, busloads of migrants are moved from federal buildings to a central station in McAllen. There, volunteers from the respite shelter help them find the right buses and purchase bus tickets. As a group, they then walk to the shelter three blocks away. There, they can shower, eat, and pick up new clothes, medicine and hygiene products.

Colorado librarian Wyne Cler saw a Facebook post from a friend's friend asking for volunteers to help. Even with her limited knowledge of Spanish, she jumped at the chance, raised $4,000 in one day and brought her daughter to help out. She spent hours trying her best to help migrants at the center and trying to cheer up their day with hearty hugs and laughter. Cler and her family fled Vietnam as the Vietnam War ended, she said.

"This is not my America. When we came in 1975 we were welcomed with open arms. And we were not separated. My entire family got here safely," Cler said.

Group Would Like To Be Able To Help More People
Not everyone arriving at the U.S. border is entering illegally, some of them are asking for asylum. This is the legal protection given to people who are afraid to return to their home country. People apply for asylum after they arrive in the United States. They are granted asylum if their lives would be put in danger by being sent back to their home countries.

On a typical day, more than 100 asylum-seekers are released from McAllen-area holding facilities. 

Many are seen clutching their belongings in clear plastic bags stamped with the logo of the Department of Homeland Security, said Norma Pimentel. She is the executive director of Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley. 

Now, Pimentel is trying to channel some of the help into cash donations so they can construct a new building by their church. The rest center currently rents its space.

The center also needs more volunteers to keep up with the flow of people and donations. 

It also needs additional medicine for babies because Montelongo said the center has seen several babies arriving who are sick.

"I'm so devoted to this respite because I think it's the first glimpse of what we all think the U.S. stands for," Montelongo said.