Volunteers from all over are happy to help immigrants at Texas center

McAllen is a city in Texas. It sits on the border between the United States and Mexico. 

Many immigrants crossed the border there and are being held in McAllen. 

Immigrants come from other countries. Sometimes they are looking for work, or to go to school. Sometimes they come because they are not safe in their home countries. There might be war, or maybe someone is trying to hurt them. 

Many Immigrants Come To The United States
Immigrants come to the United States from all over the world. Many have been coming from Central America recently. This includes countries like Honduras and Guatemala. President Donald Trump wants to stop immigrants who enter the United States without permission.

When people enter the United States without permission, they are arrested. They might be sent to jail.  Their children are taken away. The children are sent to different places. Those places might be hundreds of miles away.

Separating The Children Upset Many Americans 
Earlier in June, the U.S. government said about 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in six weeks. This was part of a new government plan.

On June 20, Trump signed an order. It was supposed to stop the separation plan. It will keep families together while they are being held by the government. They will be held in a camp. They can still be forced to leave.

Many people were sad and angry to see children taken from their parents. 

To help, they have sent thousands of items to places that shelter immigrants. 

Shelters Received Many Boxes Of Donations
One of these shelters is in McAllen. It is run by Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley. Immigrants can stay at the shelter when they are released from the government.

The shelter says thousands of boxes have arrived there. The boxes contained shirts, pants, underwear, and many other items.

The boxes started arriving around June 16. This is when people began to learn about children being taken from their parents.

People from McAllen also brought donations. 

Groups of volunteers from all over the United States have driven to McAllen. Cars were packed with donations and money.

Volunteers Are Happy To Help
Every day, about 100 immigrants leave government buildings. They move by bus to a central station in town. There, volunteers from the shelter help the immigrants find the right buses. They help them buy bus tickets. 

As a group, the immigrants then walk to the shelter three blocks away. There, they can shower and eat. They can also pick up new clothes and medicine. They can also get shampoo and toothpaste.

Hugs And Laughter Are Offered As Well
Wyne Cler is from Colorado. She saw a post on social-media asking for volunteers. 

Cler raised $4,000 in donations in one day. She brought her daughter to Texas. Cler spent hours trying to help immigrants at the center. She tried to cheer up their day with big hugs and laughter. 

In 1975, Cler and her family left Vietnam for the United States. At the time, Vietnam was at war.

"This is not my America," Cler said. "In 1975, we were welcomed with open arms. And we were not separated. My entire family got here safely," she said.

Norma Pimentel helps lead Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley.  

She is hoping for cash donations. With the money, they would like to put up a new building by their church. The donations will be put there.

The center also needs more volunteers, and more medicine for babies.