Texas asylum-seeker center runs out of space after donations pour in

Thousands of donated items have arrived at an immigrant shelter in the city of McAllen, Texas.

McAllen borders Mexico. Many immigrants are being held in McAllen.

President Donald Trump's government has been holding immigrants who crossed the border into the United States without permission. Many of them have children and they were coming from Central American countries. This includes countries like Honduras and Guatemala. 

Because the adult immigrants who entered the country illegally were being taken to jail, their children were being taken to separate facilities. Some were hundreds of miles away.

Order Says Families Can Stay Together For Now
Earlier in June, the Department of Homeland Security said that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in six weeks. The department's job is to keep the country safe from any threats. The separations were part of a new plan. This angered many people across the country. They said small children should not be taken from their mothers or fathers.

On June 20, Trump signed an order. It was meant to stop the separation plan that had been going on. This plan will keep families together while they are being held by the government. The families could still be forced to leave, though.

Not everyone arriving at the border is breaking the law. Many are seeking asylum in the United States. Asylum is the permission given to people who are afraid to return to their home country. Their lives might be in danger. These people wait to see if they will be allowed to stay.

People Sent Clothing And Notes Of Support
After being released from government buildings, some immigrants seek help at a respite center, or shelter, run by Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley. It cares for immigrants as they sort out their futures. 

Many of the donations were boxes from the shopping website Amazon. The boxes contained shirts, pants, underwear, and many other items.

The boxes started arriving around June 16. This is when people began to learn about President Trump's new "zero-tolerance" immigration plan that separated families.

Included in the donated packages were notes of support. One read, "As someone who has a dad who would do anything for their child I hope this helps a few of the dads that come through your doors with the same ideas."

Wish List Donations Help People Get Started
Natalie Montelongo flew to Texas from Washington, D.C., to volunteer at the center. She set up an Amazon wish list with items needed by the shelter and posted the link on social media.

The immigrant respite center has received so many boxes that it had to rent additional storage space.

"I feel like each one of these boxes represents one person that wishes they were here and is following the issue and that cares," Montelongo said.

Local residents also stopped by and dropped off donations. Groups of volunteers from around the country drove together to McAllen. Cars were packed with supplies and cash.

Every day, busloads of migrants are moved from federal government buildings to a central station in McAllen. There, volunteers from the shelter help them find the right buses and buy bus tickets. As a group, they then walk to the shelter three blocks away. There, they can shower, eat, and pick up new clothes, medicine and personal products.

"We Were Welcomed With Open Arms"
Colorado librarian Wyne Cler saw a post on social-media site Facebook asking for volunteers to help. She jumped at the chance, raised $4,000 in one day, and brought her daughter. She spent hours trying her best to help migrants at the center. She tried to cheer up their day with big hugs and laughter. 

Cler knew what they might be feeling. She and her family left Vietnam for the United States as the Vietnam War ended, she said.

"This is not my America. When we came in 1975 we were welcomed with open arms. And we were not separated. My entire family got here safely," Cler said.

Wanted: More Volunteers To Help Keep Up
On a typical day, more than 100 asylum-seekers are released from McAllen-area holding facilities. Many are seen clutching their belongings in clear plastic bags stamped with government symbols, said Norma Pimentel. She helps lead Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley. 

Now, Pimentel is hoping for cash donations. With the money, they want to build a new building by their church. The shelter currently rents its space.

The center also needs more volunteers to keep up with the flow of people and donations. 

It also needs additional medicine for babies. Montelongo said the center has seen several babies arriving sick.

The shelter shows "what we all think the U.S. stands for," Montelongo said.