Border asylum-seeker center overflows with donations

An outpouring of donations has boosted an immigrant shelter in McAllen, Texas.

McAllen borders Mexico, and many immigrants are being held in the city by the U.S. government after crossing the border. Some of them seek help at a respite center run by Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley, which cares for immigrants as they sort out their futures. 

Around Father's Day, the surge of Amazon boxes containing shirts, pants, underwear and many other items began arriving at the shelter.

The boxes started turning up as people across the country began to learn about President Donald Trump's policy of separating children from their families at the border.

Included in the packages were notes of support. One read, "As someone who has a dad who would do anything for their child I hope this helps a few of the dads that come through your doors with the same ideas."

"All of the sudden they started getting like a thousand boxes a day and then more and then more. And they had to come and secure space here and that filled up and they got another space and that filled up," said Natalie Montelongo, a native of nearby Brownsville, who flew in from Washington, D.C., to volunteer at the center. She set up an Amazon wish list with items needed by the shelter and posted the link on social media.

Donations, Volunteers Turned Up By The Truckload
The immigrant respite center has received so many boxes that it had to rent additional storage space.

"I feel like each one of these boxes represents one person that wishes they were here and is following the issue and that cares," Montelongo said. She is a national campaign strategist for the American Civil Liberties Union. They are a civil rights group.

Donations also came the old-fashioned way, too. Local residents stopped by and dropped off what they could, and caravans of volunteers from around the country made the journey to McAllen, in Texas's Rio Grande Valley, packed with donations and cash.

"Zero Tolerance" Devastates Families
Earlier in June, the Department of Homeland Security announced that nearly 2,000 children had been separated from their parents in a six-week period as part of its "zero-tolerance" plan. The Trump administration has been cracking down on adult immigrants who cross the border between the United States and Mexico illegally by criminally prosecuting them. Children could not be held in criminal detention, so they were being separated from their parents.

There are also some cases in which immigrant families who entered the United States legally asking for asylum, have also been separated.

On June 20, Trump signed an executive order that he said stopped the administration's policy of separating children from their parents at the border.

The order does not end the "zero-tolerance" policy that criminally prosecutes adults for crossing the border illegally. It does keep families together while they are in custody, though.

Every day, busloads of migrants are transferred from federal facilities to a central station in McAllen. There, volunteers from the respite shelter help find the right buses and purchase bus tickets. As a group, they then walk to the shelter three blocks away, where they can shower, eat, and pick up new clothes, medicine and hygiene products.

"This Is Not My America"
Colorado librarian Wyne Cler saw a Facebook post from a friend's friend asking for volunteers to help. Even with her limited Spanish, she jumped at the chance, raised $4,000 in one day and brought her daughter along. She spent hours trying her best to help migrants at the center. She tried to cheer up their day with hearty hugs and laughter. Cler could relate to them. She and her family fled Vietnam as the war ended, she said.

"This is not my America. When we came in 1975 we were welcomed with open arms. And we were not separated. My entire family got here safely," Cler said.

On a typical day, more than 100 asylum-seekers are released from McAllen-area holding facilities. Many are seen clutching their belongings in clear plastic bags stamped with Department of Homeland Security logos, said Norma Pimentel. She is the executive director of Catholic Charities of the Rio Grande Valley.

Now, Pimentel is trying to channel some of the help into cash donations so they can construct a new building by their church. The rest center currently rents its space.

The center also needs more volunteers to keep up with the flow of people and donations. It also needs additional medicine for babies. Montelongo said the center has seen several babies arriving sick.

"I'm so devoted to this respite because I think it's the first glimpse of what we all think the U.S. stands for," Montelongo said.