Supreme Court upholds Trump's travel ban on several mostly Muslim countries

A sharply divided Supreme Court on Tuesday, June 26, upheld President Donald Trump's ban on travel from several Muslim-majority countries. The court rejected a challenge that the ban discriminated against Muslims or exceeded his authority. A justice who disagreed with the decision said the outcome was a historic mistake.

The 5 to 4 decision on Tuesday is a big victory for Trump on an issue that is central to his presidency, and the court's first substantive ruling on a Trump administration rule. The president quickly tweeted his reaction, "Wow!"

Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the majority opinion for the five conservative justices, including Trump nominee Neil Gorsuch.

Decision Rejects Claim Of Anti-Muslim Bias

Roberts wrote that presidents have significant power to regulate immigration. He also rejected the challengers' claim of anti-Muslim bias.

However, he was careful not to support Trump's negative statements about immigration in general or Muslims in particular. He did not give support for Trump's campaign pledge to keep Muslims from entering the country.

Roberts wrote that the court expresses no view on whether the rule is a good idea.

The travel ban has been fully in place since December. At that time, the Supreme Court stopped lower court rulings that had said the rule was out of bounds and blocked part of it from being enforced.

History Will Not Look Kindly On Ruling

In a disagreement she summarized in court, Justice Sonia Sotomayor said, "History will not look kindly on the court's misguided decision today, nor should it." Justices Stephen Breyer, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Elena Kagan also joined her in disagreeing with the majority vote.

Sotomayor wrote that based on the evidence in the case, a reasonable observer would conclude that the rule was motivated by anti-Muslim feelings. She said the justices in the majority arrived at the opposite result by ignoring the facts and misunderstanding previous legal cases. The five justices in the majority turned a blind eye to the pain and suffering the rule forces onto countless families and individuals, she said. She pointed out that many of those families are U.S. citizens.

Echoes Of Japanese Held In Prison Camps

She likened the case to the discredited Korematsu V. U.S. decision that upheld the detention of Japanese-Americans during World War II. President Franklin D. Roosevelt had ordered Japanese-Americans to be held in prison camps from 1942 to 1945. It was a serious violation of civil rights, but the Supreme Court allowed it.

Roberts responded in his opinion that "Korematsu has nothing to do with this case" and "was gravely wrong the day it was decided."

The travel ban was among the court's biggest cases this term. It was the latest in a string of 5 to 4 decisions in which the conservative side of the court, strengthened by the addition of Gorsuch last year, prevailed.

The Trump rule applies to travelers from five countries with Muslim-majority populations. The countries include Iran, Libya, Somalia, Syria and Yemen. It also affects two non-Muslim-majority countries, blocking travelers from North Korea and some Venezuelan government officials and their families. A sixth Muslim-majority country, Chad, was removed from the list in April after improving "its identity-management and information sharing practices," Trump said in a statement. Chad is a country in central Africa.

The administration had pointed to the Chad decision to show that the restrictions are based only on national security concerns.

The challengers, however, argued that the court could not just ignore all that has happened, beginning with Trump's campaign tweets to prevent the entry of Muslims into the United States.

The travel ban has long been central to Trump's presidency.

Travel Ban Announced With Little Warning

He proposed a broad, all-encompassing Muslim ban during the presidential campaign in 2015, drawing swift rebukes from Republicans as well as Democrats. Within a week of taking office, the first travel ban was announced with little warning, sparking chaos at airports and protests across the nation.

While the ban has changed shape since then, it has remained a key part of Trump's "America First" vision. The president believes that the restriction, along with his promised wall at the southern border between the United States and Mexico, would make the United States safer from potentially hostile foreigners.

In a statement he released on June 26, Trump hailed the decision as "a moment of profound vindication." He said it followed months of hysterical opinions from "the media and Democratic politicians who refuse to do what it takes to secure our border and our country."

Strongly disagreeing, Democratic Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota said, "This decision will someday serve as a marker of shame." Ellison, the first Muslim elected to Congress, and Senator Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, who was born in Japan, both compared the ban and the ruling to the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II.

Critics of Trump's ban had urged the justices to repeat the decisions in lower courts. The lower courts generally concluded that the changes made to the travel rule did not erase the ban's legal problems.

The current version dates from last September and it followed what the administration has called a thorough review by several federal agencies. No such review has been shared with courts or the public, though.

Federal trial judges in Hawaii and Maryland had blocked the travel ban from taking effect. The judges found that the new version looked too much like the old versions.

"Grounding In National Security Concerns"

The Supreme Court came to a different conclusion on June 26, though. The rule has a "grounding in national security concerns," and it has several moderating features, including a program that would allow some people from the affected countries to enter the United States, Roberts said.

The challengers to the ban asserted that Trump's statements crossed a constitutional line, Roberts said.

"But the issue before us is not whether to denounce the statements. It is instead the significance of those statements in reviewing a Presidential directive," he said. Roberts said that the rule is neutral and addresses a matter within the president's responsibilities.
