Supreme Court rejects challenge that Trump travel ban discriminates against Muslims

A sharply divided Supreme Court on Tuesday, June 26, upheld President Donald Trump's travel ban. The ban limits travel from several Muslim-majority countries. The court rejected a challenge that the ban discriminated against Muslims or exceeded Trump's authority. A justice who disagreed with the decision said the outcome was a historic mistake.

The 5 to 4 decision on Tuesday is a big victory for Trump on an issue that is central to his presidency, and the court's first substantive ruling on a Trump administration rule. The president quickly tweeted his reaction, "Wow!"

When the Supreme Court rules on an issue, it often explains its decision in a majority opinion. The justices who do not agree may issue a minority opinion outlining their objections. Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the majority opinion for the five conservative justices. The majority included Trump's one addition to the court, Neil Gorsuch.

Presidents Have Power To Regulate Immigration

Roberts wrote that presidents have significant power to regulate immigration. He also rejected the challengers' claim that the rule is unfair to Muslims.

However, he was careful not to support Trump's statements against immigration in general or Muslims in particular. He did not give support to Trump's campaign pledge to keep Muslims from entering the country.

No View On Whether Rule Is Good Idea

Roberts wrote that the court expresses no view on whether the rule is a good idea.

The travel ban has been fully in place since December. At that time, the Supreme Court stopped lower court rulings that had said the rule was out of bounds and blocked part of it from being enforced.

Justice Sonia Sotomayor summarized her disagreement in court. She said that history will not look kindly on the court's bad judgment, nor should it. Justices Stephen Breyer, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Elena Kagan also joined her in disagreeing with the majority.

Decision Motivated By Anti-Muslim Feelings

Sotomayor wrote that based on the evidence in the case, a reasonable observer would conclude that the rule was motivated by anti-Muslim feelings. She said the justices in the majority arrived at the opposite result by ignoring the facts and misunderstanding previous legal cases. The five justices in the majority turned a blind eye to the pain and suffering the rule forces onto countless families and individuals, she said. She pointed out that many of those families are U.S. citizens.

She likened the case to the Korematsu versus U.S. decision. That is a Supreme Court decision now seen as wrong and immoral. It allowed the government to put Japanese-Americans in prison camps during World War II. President Franklin D. Roosevelt had ordered Japanese-Americans to be held in prison camps from 1942 to 1945. The rule took away people's rights, but the Supreme Court allowed it.

Roberts responded in his opinion that "Korematsu has nothing to do with this case" and "was gravely wrong the day it was decided."

The Trump rule applies to travelers from five countries with Muslim-majority populations. The countries include Iran, Libya, Somalia, Syria and Yemen.

The ban also impacts two countries that do not have a Muslim-majority population. It bans travelers from North Korea and some Venezuelan government officials and their families.

Travel Ban Central To Trump's Presidency

The travel ban has long been central to Trump's presidency.

He proposed a ban on all Muslims during the presidential campaign in 2015. The plan was quickly criticized by Republicans as well as Democrats. Within a week of taking office, the first travel ban was announced with little warning. It led to chaos at airports and protests across the nation.

The ban has changed shape since then. It still remains a key part of Trump's "America First" vision, though. The president believes that the restriction, along with his promised wall at the southern border between the United States and Mexico, would make the U.S. safer from potentially dangerous foreigners.

Trump released a statement on June 26. He hailed the decision for proving him right. He said it followed months of hysterical opinions from "the media and Democratic politicians who refuse to do what it takes to secure our border and our country."

A Marker Of Shame

Democratic Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota strongly disagreed. He said, "This decision will someday serve as a marker of shame." Ellison, the first Muslim elected to Congress, and Senator Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, who was born in Japan, both compared the ban and the ruling to the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II.

Critics of Trump's ban wanted the justices to repeat the decisions in lower courts. The lower courts generally concluded that the changes made to the travel rule did not erase the ban's legal problems.

Federal trial judges in Hawaii and Maryland had blocked the travel ban from taking effect. The judges found that the new version looked too much like the old versions.

The Supreme Court came to a different conclusion on June 26, though. The rule has a "grounding in national security concerns," Roberts said. It has several features to make it less extreme, including a program that would allow some people from the affected countries to enter the United States, Roberts said.

The challengers to the ban said that Trump's statements crossed a constitutional line, Roberts said.

The issue is not Trump's statements directly, Roberts said. "It is instead the significance of those statements in reviewing a Presidential directive," he said. Roberts said that the rule is neutral and addresses a matter within the president's responsibilities.
