Supreme Court decides Trump travel ban on Muslim countries can stay in effect

The Supreme Court made a big decision on Tuesday, June 26. The court said President Donald Trump's travel ban can stay in effect. The ban limits travel from several Muslim-majority countries. A challenge to the ban said that it was unfair to Muslims. It also said the president went outside of his powers to make the rule. The court disagreed with both claims.

The Supreme Court is the highest court of the United States. It has nine members, known as justices. Five justices agreed with the decision and four did not. A justice who disagreed said the court was making a historic mistake.

First Major Ruling

The June 26 decision is a big victory for Trump. It was the court's first major ruling on a Trump government rule. The president quickly tweeted his reaction, "Wow!"

When the Supreme Court rules on an issue, it often explains its decision in a majority opinion. The justices who do not agree may issue a minority opinion about why they do not agree. Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the majority opinion for the five justices.

Roberts wrote that presidents have the power to control who can come into the country. He also said the rule is not unfair to Muslims.

No Support For Some Of Trump's Statements

He was careful not to support some of Trump's statements, though. He did not give support for Trump's pledge to keep Muslims from entering the country.

Roberts wrote that the court only says that the rule is allowed. The court expresses no view on whether the rule is a good or bad idea.

Justice Sonia Sotomayor disagreed with the majority. She explained her disagreement in court. She said that history will not look kindly on the court's bad judgment.

Ignoring The Facts

Sotomayor wrote that a reasonable observer would see that Trump's rule was motivated by anti-Muslim feelings. She said the justices in the majority arrived at the opposite result. They ignored the facts and misunderstood previous court cases, she said.

Sotomayor said the case is like the Korematsu versus U.S. decision. That decision is now seen as wrong and immoral. It allowed the government to put Japanese-Americans in prison camps during World War II. The rule was in place from 1942 to 1945. It took away people's rights, but the Supreme Court allowed it.

Roberts responded that "Korematsu has nothing to do with this case." He said the Korematsu decision was wrong from the beginning.

The Trump rule applies to travelers from five countries where most people are Muslim. The countries include Iran, Libya, Somalia, Syria and Yemen.

The new rule bans people from two other countries. They are not Muslim-majority countries. They are North Korea and Venezuela. 

People Protest Travel Ban

Trump proposed stopping all Muslims from entering the United States when he ran for president in 2015. The plan was criticized by both political parties. Within a week of taking office, the first travel ban was announced with little warning. People protested the rule across the nation.

The travel limits have changed since then. They still remain a key part of Trump's "America First" vision, though. The president believes that the limits will make the United States safer from possibly dangerous foreigners.

Critics of Trump's rule wanted the justices to repeat the decisions made in lower courts. The lower courts generally concluded that the law was still problematic and should not be in place.

Judges in Hawaii and Maryland had blocked the travel ban from taking effect. The judges found that the new version looked too much like the old versions.

The Supreme Court came to a different conclusion on June 26, though. The rule has a "grounding in national security concerns," Roberts said. Parts of the rule make it less extreme, including a program that would allow some people from the affected countries to enter the United States, he said.

Roberts said that the rule is fair. It addresses a matter within the president's responsibilities, he said.
